The Project Gutenberg eBook of Flowering Plants of South Africa vol. 5
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Flowering Plants of South Africa vol. 5

Author: I. B. Pole Evans

Release date: July 31, 2025 [eBook #76601]

Language: English

Original publication: London: L. Reeve & Co, 1925

Credits: Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from images made available by the HathiTrust Digital Library.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FLOWERING PLANTS OF SOUTH AFRICA VOL. 5 ***





                        THE FLOWERING PLANTS OF
                             SOUTH AFRICA.

 A MAGAZINE CONTAINING HAND-COLOURED FIGURES WITH DESCRIPTIONS OF THE
             FLOWERING PLANTS INDIGENOUS TO SOUTH AFRICA.

                               EDITED BY
            I. B. POLE EVANS, C.M.G., M.A., D.Sc., F.L.S.,
            Chief, Division of Botany and Plant Pathology,
                 Department of Agriculture, Pretoria;
  and Director of the Botanical Survey of the Union of South Africa.

                                VOL. V.

                            [Illustration]

               The veld which lies so desolate and bare
               Will blossom into cities white and fair,
               And pinnacles will pierce the desert air,
                        And sparkle in the sun.

                  R. C. MACFIE’S “EX UNITATE VIRES.”


                                LONDON:
                         L. REEVE & CO., LTD.,
                HENRIETTA STREET, COVENT GARDEN, LONDON

                             SOUTH AFRICA:
              THE SPECIALTY PRESS OF SOUTH AFRICA, LTD.,
         P.O. BOX 3958, JOHANNESBURG; P.O. BOX 388, CAPETOWN.
                                 1925.

                       [_All rights reserved._]




                              THIS VOLUME
                        IS CORDIALLY DEDICATED
                                  TO
                         THOMAS PEARSON STOKOE
                             OF CAPE TOWN

                WHOSE INDEFATIGABLE EXERTIONS IN EXPLORING
                THE FLORA OF THE CAPE MOUNTAINS HAVE
                RENDERED VALUABLE SERVICE TO SOUTH AFRICAN
                BOTANY BY THE DISCOVERY OF NEW PLANTS AND
                THE RE-DISCOVERY OF MANY THAT WERE LONG
                LOST, AND TO WHOSE ZEAL, ENTHUSIASM, AND
                GENEROSITY AS A COLLECTOR THIS WORK IS
                GREATLY INDEBTED.

DIVISION OF BOTANY, PRETORIA.
_October, 1925._

[Illustration: 161.]




PLATE 161.

COTYLEDON ORBICULATA.

_Cape Province, Transvaal._


CRASSULACEAE.

COTYLEDON, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. i. p. 659.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Cotyledon orbiculata=, _Linn. Sp. Pl._ 614; _Fl. Cap._ vol. ii. p. 371.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Cotyledon orbiculata_ was first figured in the _Botanical Magazine_ in
1795, and stated to have been introduced into English gardens about the
year 1690. The genus _Cotyledon_ differs from _Crassula_ (see Plate 115)
by having twice as many stamens as petals. It is a large genus in South
Africa, and represented by between 30 to 40 species. Several species of
the genus are of economic interest inasmuch as they produce disease in
stock. The well-known “Krimptziekte” of goats is caused by _C.
Wallichii_. The Division of Veterinary Education and Research carried
out some feeding experiments with _C. orbiculata_ in 1921 at
Grahamstown, and definitely proved that feeding the leaves to fowls
caused death.

Our plate was prepared from specimens grown at the Division of Botany,
Pretoria. The plant goes under the common names of “hondenoor,”
“Konterie,” “Varkens ooren,” and “pig’s-ear.”

DESCRIPTION:--Low shrubby somewhat succulent plant. _Stem_ with
light-brown bark. _Leaves_ opposite, 6·5 to 8 cm. long, 4 to 4·5 cm.
broad, obovate, subacute, glabrous, glaucous, with red margins.
_Peduncle_ up to 27 cm. long, 8 mm. in diameter, terete, reddish in
colour with a whitish bloom. _Inflorescence_ a panicle of cymes.
_Calyx-tube_ almost none; lobes 5 mm. long, ovate, acute. _Corolla-tube_
2·8 cm. long, 1·5 cm. in diameter; lobes 2 cm. long, 7 mm. broad,
oblong, obtuse, slightly twisted counter-clockwise. _Stamens_ 10, five
shorter inserted near the base of the corolla-tube, with a ring of hairs
at the point of attachment and produced below the hairs into a strong
rib; filaments subterete; anthers ovate. _Carpels_ as long as the
shorter stamens. _Glands_ forming a deep concave body at the base of
each carpel.

     PLATE 161.--Fig. 1, longitudinal median section of the flower; Fig.
     2, gynæcium, showing glands; Fig. 3, stamen; Fig. 4, tuft of hairs
     on filament; Fig. 5, side view of gland at base of carpel.

     F.P.S.A., 1925.

[Illustration: 162.]




PLATE 162.

SYNNOTIA BICOLOR.

_Cape Province._

IRIDACEAE. Tribe IXIEAE.

SYNNOTIA, _Sweet_; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 709.

       *       *       *       *       *

              =Synnotia bicolor=, _Sweet_, _Hort. Brit._
ed. 2, p. 501; _Fl. Cap._ vol. vi. p. 134.

       *       *       *       *       *


This species was introduced into the Royal Botanic Garden at Kew by
George Masson in 1786, and was described as a _Gladiolus_, and later in
the _Botanical Magazine_ (t. 548) as a species of _Ixia_. From the
former genus it is readily distinguished by the membranous lacerated
spathe-valves and from the latter by the unilateral stamens.

The plant is rather stiff, but the individual flowers are quite
charming. As will be seen from the illustration, the flowers resemble in
general shape those of _Gladiolus orchidi-florus_ shown at Plate 165 of
this work.

Our specimen was prepared from plants grown by Dr. I. B. Pole Evans,
C.M.G., from corms forwarded by Mrs. E. Rood of van Rhynsdorp.

DESCRIPTION:--_Corm_ ellipsoid, 3 cm. long, 1·5 cm. in diameter, covered
with fine reticulated sheaths. _Leaves_ 7 in a basal distichous rosette,
8 to 11 cm. long, 0·7 to 1·4 cm. broad, linear-oblong, very acute, with
1 more or less evident mid-rib, but many-veined when viewed in
transmitted light. _Peduncle_ about 12 cm. long, flexuose, bearing about
6 distant flowers. _Outer spathe-valves_ 1 cm. long, deeply 3-partite,
inner 2-partite. _Perianth_ distinctly 2-lipped; tube 1·5 cm. long,
widening upwards; posterior segment 2·5 cm. long, erect, clawed, with an
ovate obtuse limb; side-segments 1·7 cm. long, 6 mm. broad, more or less
oblong, obtuse, spreading-reflexed; 3 anterior segments more or less
horizontal and forming a distinct lip. _Style_ as long as the stamens,
divided into 3 lobes dilated at the apex. (National Herb. Pretoria, No.
2860.)

     PLATE 162.--Fig. 1, median longitudinal section of flower; Fig. 2,
     spathe-valve; Fig. 3, stamen; Fig. 4, style showing stigmas; Fig.
     5, fruit.

     F.P.S.A., 1925.

[Illustration: 163.]




PLATE 163.

GLADIOLUS TRICHOSTACHYS.

_Transvaal._

IRIDACEAE. Tribe IXIEAE.

GLADIOLUS, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 709.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Gladiolus trichostachys=, _Baker in Bull._ _Herb. Boiss._ ser. II. vol. iv.
p. 1006.

       *       *       *       *       *


This charming little _Gladiolus_ was first found by Conrath at Irene,
near Pretoria, and was again collected by Dr. I. B. Pole Evans, C.M.G.,
in the same locality. It was described by Baker, with several other
Transvaal species, in 1904, but is here figured for the first time.

The plant produces a single erect flowering stem with clasping leaves
scarcely produced above. The species belongs to the Section _Hebea_,
which we have illustrated on Plates 63 and 165 (_G. alatus_, _G.
orchidiflorus_), and is closely related to _G. permeabilis_, a species
common in the Cape Province, but which also extends into Bechuanaland.
It is, however, easily distinguished from this species by the
non-produced leaves and hairy stems.

Our illustration was made from the specimens collected by Dr. I. B. Pole
Evans, C.M.G., at Irene.

DESCRIPTION:--_Bulb_ 2 cm. in diameter, globose, covered with brown
fibres. _Stem_ pilose on the lower half. _Leaves_ clasping the stem,
sheath pilose, hardly produced. _Inflorescence_ 13 cm. long, 7-to
10-flowered. _Outer spathe-valves_ 1·5 cm. long, somewhat membranous
above, entire, bifid or trifid; inner spathe-valves similar to the
outer, bifid. _Stamens_ shorter than the style; anthers somewhat
sagittate at the base. _Style-branches_ cuneate, fimbriate on the
edges.

     PLATE 163.--Fig. 1, plant much reduced; Fig. 2, median longitudinal
     section of flower; Fig. 3, outer spathe-valve; Fig. 4, inner
     spathe-valve; Fig. 5, anther; Fig. 6, portion of style with style
     branches.

     F.P.S.A., 1925.

[Illustration: 164.]




PLATE 164.

ALOE CHABAUDII.

_Rhodesia._

LILIACEAE. Tribe ALOINEAE.

ALOE, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 776.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Aloe Chabaudii=, _Schonl. in Gard. Chron._ 1905, p. 162.

       *       *       *       *       *


Dr. Schonland in his description of this _Aloe_ in the _Gardeners’
Chronicle_ states that it is allied to _A. striata_, and a reference to
our Plate 55 will show the similarity of the flowers in the two species.
The specimens from which the original description was prepared were
collected by Mr. J. M. Brown in Rhodesia, but the exact locality is not
known. They were grown and flowered by Mr. J. A. Chabaud of Port
Elizabeth. The plant is erect with a short stem, and has not the
reclining habit of _A. striata_. It is very suitable for large
rockeries, and makes an effective display when in flower.

Our plate was prepared from specimens grown at the Division of Botany,
Pretoria.

DESCRIPTION:--Acaulescent or almost so. _Leaves_ 18 to 24, forming an
irregular rosette, up to 45 cm. long and 15 cm. broad near the base,
about 2 cm. thick, ovate-lanceolate, unspotted, somewhat glaucous; upper
surface indistinctly striate, nearly flat, except near the apex, where
it is channelled; lower surface slightly convex; margin with a narrow
horny border; prickles 1·5 mm. long or even smaller, at first
flesh-coloured, brown in older leaves, straight or (especially in the
upper portion of the leaf) curved forward, about 1·5 cm. apart,
interspaces straight. _Inflorescence_ a loose panicle, with squarrose
ascending branches 60 to 80 cm. in height, about 45 cm. in diameter;
racemes lax, floriferous portion 15 to 20 cm. long; bracts deltoid,
acuminate, membranous, lowest about 6 mm. long, upper gradually smaller;
pedicels spreading, lowest 2 cm. long, upper only slightly smaller;
perianth 3·5 cm. long, slightly curved, distinctly obconical at the
base, swollen round the ovary, with three decided oblong indentations
above it (in a line with the inner segments); outer segments pale
brick-red with nearly white wings near the apex, inner with red median
line and pale wings, which are yellowish at the apex; tube of corolla
nearly two-thirds its length; filaments yellow, slightly exceeding the
perianth in length, anthers pale terra-cotta; ovary broadly oblong,
green; style yellow, not exserted; stigma very small, capitate (S.
Schonland).

     PLATE 164.--Fig. 1, median longitudinal section of flower; Fig. 2,
     bract; Fig. 3, anther; Fig. 4, apex of style.

     F.P.S.A., 1925.
[Illustration: 165.]




PLATE 165.

GLADIOLUS ORCHIDIFLORUS.

_Cape Province._


IRIDACEAE. Tribe IXIEAE.

GLADIOLUS, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 709.


       *       *       *       *       *

=Gladiolus orchidiflorus= _Andr. Bot. Rep._ t. 241; _Fl. Cap._ vol. vi. p. 160.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the _Botanical Magazine_ for the year 1803 (Plate 688) appeared an
excellent figure of this species under the name _Gladiolus viperatus_,
which was given owing to a fanciful resemblance to “the head and
appearance of the jaws of the snake when raising itself for defence
against its enemy and hissing.” Prior to the figure above quoted Jacquin
illustrated the same species (1781-1786).

Like most species of _Gladiolus_, it lends itself to cultivation and is
easily grown in pots.

A comparison of this plate of _G. orchidiflorus_ and Plate 63 (_G.
alatus_ var. _namaquensis_) should be made with other plates of
_Gladiolus_ figured. The two species belong to the section _Hebea_, all
the members of which may be easily recognised by the long claws to the
perianth-segments.

The plants from which our illustration was made were grown by Dr. I. B.
Pole Evans, C.M.G., at Irene, near Pretoria, from corms sent by Mrs. E.
Rood of van Rhynsdorp.

DESCRIPTION:--_Corm_ 2·5 cm. diameter, depressed-globose, covered with
fibrous tunics. _Produced leaves_ 4; lowest leaf with a
lanceolate-linear blade, 6·5 cm. long, 8 mm. broad, prominently
2-ribbed; upper leaves up to 30 cm. long, 5 to 8 mm. broad, linear,
acuminate, acute, with 2 of the ribs more prominent than the others,
glabrous. _Inflorescence_ about half as long as the leaves, laxly
few-flowered. _Perianth_ very unequal; the uppermost segment long-clawed
and with an oblong obtuse blade membranous on the margins, arched over
the flower and the style and stamens; side segments broadly ovate,
clawed, and produced into an acuminate point; lower segments more or
less forming a lip, spathulate, long-clawed, obtuse. _Stamens_ arched
under the uppermost segment and completely hidden by it. _Style_ arched
under the uppermost segment, projecting beyond its apex; lobes
spathulate, papillose round the edges. (National Herb. Pretoria, No.
2858.)

     PLATE 165.--Fig. 1, plant much reduced; Fig. 2, median longitudinal
     section of flower; Fig. 3, corm; Fig. 4, spathe-valve; Fig. 5,
     stamen; Fig. 6, top of style showing the 3 stigmas; Fig. 7, fruit.

     F.P.S.A., 1925.
[Illustration: 166.]




PLATE 166.

LACHENALIA TRICOLOR.
var. LUTEOLA.

_Cape Province._


LILIACEAE. Tribe SCILLEAE.

LACHENALIA, _Jacq._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 807.


       *       *       *       *       *

=Lachenalia tricolor=, _Thunb._ var. =luteola=, _Baker_.; _Jacq. Collect._ vol. iv.
p. 148; _Ic._ vol. ii. p. 16, t. 395; _Fl. Cap._ vol. vi. p. 424.

       *       *       *       *       *

The _Lachenalia_ figured on the accompanying plate is among the most
graceful species in the genus. It is closely allied to _L. pendula_,
illustrated on Plate 158, but is distinguished by having the inner
perianth-segments much longer than the outer. The plant was known to
horticulturists in Europe almost 150 years ago, and was figured in
colour between 1786 and 1793 by Jacquin, and again in the _Botanical
Magazine_ in 1807.

_L. tricolor_ grows in the sandy parts of the Cape Province, but lends
itself to cultivation in pots. It has been successfully grown at Irene,
near Pretoria, by Dr. I. B. Pole Evans, C.M.G., from bulbs supplied by
Lady Smartt of “Glen Ban,” Stellenbosch, C.P., and from these specimens
our illustration was made.

In the young flowering stage the buds are quite green, but become yellow
in the lower half as they grow older, while in the adult flower the
colour is a deep chrome (R. C. S.).

DESCRIPTION:--_Bulb_ globose, 1·3 cm. in diameter, with long white roots
from the base. _Leaves_ 2, up to 17 cm. long, 2·5 cm. broad at the base,
2 cm. broad above, strap-shaped, obtuse, glabrous. _Peduncle_ up to 16
cm. long, terete, green, spotted with brown. _Flowers_ racemose,
pendulous, each flower arising from a small pocket formed by the bract.
_Bract_ 3 mm. long, ovate-lanceolate, obtuse, with a conical blunt spur.
_Outer perianth-segments_ 1·6 cm. long, oblong, obtuse, one slightly
beaked below the apex; inner segments 2·6 cm. long, widened upwards,
obtuse. Stamens hardly exerted. _Style_ as long as the stamens,
penicillate at the apex. (National Herb. Pretoria, No. 2857.)

       *       *       *       *       *

PLATE 166.--Fig. 1, whole plant much reduced; Fig. 2, median
longitudinal section of the flower; Fig. 3, bulb; Fig. 4, part of
peduncle showing pocket-like bracts; Fig. 5, stamen; Fig. 6, upper
portion of style showing stigma.

F.P.S.A., 1925. [Illustration: 167.]




PLATE 167.

CRASSULA ROSULARIS.

_Cape Province_, _Natal_.


CRASSULACEAE.

CRASSULA, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. i. p. 657.


       *       *       *       *       *

=Crassula rosularis=, _Harv._; _Fl. Cap._ vol. ii. p. 350.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Crassula rosularis_ belongs to the section _Rosulares_, which is
characterised by having rosulate flat radical leaves and a scape-like
flowering stem. Unlike so many species of _Crassula_, it is a
shade-loving plant.

The plant from which our illustration was made was found growing under
Aloes near Greytown in Natal, whence it extends southwards to Uitenhage.
It is a dainty little plant, and would thrive on a shaded rockery if
supplied with humus and a fair amount of moisture. In its choice of
habitat it resembles very much _C. flabellifolia_, _C. Saxifraga_ and
_C. Septas_.

We are indebted to Lady Leuchars for the specimens.

DESCRIPTION:--An acaulescent plant. _Leaves_ rosulate, radical; lower
leaves spathulate-oblong, about 5 cm. long; the upper leaves becoming
gradually smaller and broadly ovate; all with cartilaginous-ciliated
margins. _Peduncle_ scape-like, glabrous. _Flowers_ in peduncled cymes,
arranged in a panicle on a common peduncle. _Pedicels_ about 2 mm. long.
_Calyx_ half as long as the corolla; lobes lanceolate-oblong, ciliate.
_Petals_ obovate-oblong, with a dorsal apiculus just below the apex.
_Stamens_ 5, almost as long as the petals and alternating with them.
_Glands_ of 5 scales opposite the carpels. _Carpels_ 5; styles short;
stigmas capitate. (National Herb. Pretoria, No. 2859.)

     PLATE 167.--Fig. 1, median longitudinal section of flower; Fig. 2,
     carpels; Fig. 3, stamens.

     F.P.S.A., 1925.
[Illustration: 168.]



PLATE 168.

LISSOCHILUS SPECIOSUS.

_Cape Province, Natal, Transvaal._


ORCHIDACEAE. Tribe Vandeae.

LISSOCHILUS, _R. Br._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 536.


       *       *       *       *       *

=Lissochilus speciosus=, _R. Br._ ex _Lindl. Coll. Bot._ t. 31; _Fl. Cap._ vol. v.
sect. iii. p. 59.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Lissochilus speciosus_ is one of the more common species of the genus
and has a wide range of distribution. It is found in the Uitenhage
Division, and then follows the coastal belt northwards, through the
Transkei into Natal, and up to the northern spurs of the Drakensbergen
in the Transvaal. The species has also been recorded from Mazoe in
Rhodesia. Robert Brown’s genus _Lissochilus_, which he founded in 1821,
was based on this species. But the late Dr. H. Bolus placed it in the
genus _Eulophia_, and redescribed the plant as _Eulophia speciosa_ in
1890, and figured it under the same name in 1911 (_Orchids of South
Africa_, vol. ii. t. 13).

The specimen from which our plate was made was found by Misses H. Forbes
and S. Gower at Isipingo, Natal, and grown at the Division of Botany,
Pretoria. It is common all along the slopes of the sandhills of the
Southern Natal coast.

DESCRIPTION:--Pseudobulbs ovoid, 5 cm. or more long, with a few ovate
sheaths, 3-to 5-leaved; leaves elongate, linear, acute, somewhat fleshy,
without prominent veins, conduplicate below, not articulated above the
base, 15 to 30 cm. or more long, 2 to 2·5 cm. or more broad; scapes
erect, stout, up to nearly 1 m. long, with several spathaceous sheaths;
racemes long, somewhat lax, many flowered, flowers medium-sized, bracts
ovate-oblong to ovate-lanceolate, acuminate, 2 to 2·5 cm. long; pedicels
2 to 2·5 cm. long; sepals ovate to ovate-oblong, subacute or acute,
reflexed, green, about 1 cm. long; petals spreading, broadly ovate or
ovate-suborbicular, subobtuse, about 2 cm. long, bright yellow; lip
3-lobed, nearly as long as the petals; side-lobes suberect, short and
transversely oblong, white with a few reddish lines; front lobe broadly
elliptic, obtuse, reflexed at the sides, yellow with a few reddish lines
at the base; disc convex, with 3 obtuse keels; spur very short, broadly
conical, obtuse, column oblong, 6 mm. long (_Flora Capensis_).

     PLATE 168.--Fig. 1, plant much reduced: Fig. 2, median longitudinal
     section of flower; Fig. 3, bract; Fig. 4, anthers; Fig. 5, back
     view of anthers.

     F.P.S.A., 1925.
[Illustration: 169.]




PLATE 169.

ALOE FEROX.

_Cape Province_, _Natal_, _Transvaal_.


LILIACEAE. Tribe ALOINEAE.

ALOE, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 776.


       *       *       *       *       *

=Aloe ferox=, _Miller, Gard. Dict._ ed. viii. No. 22; _Fl. Cap._ vol. vi. p. 326.

       *       *       *       *       *

This species of _Aloe_ is unique among the South African representatives
of the genus as being of some economic importance. The thick juice of
the leaves yields the commercial product “aloes.” The method of
preparing “aloes” is as follows: A hole is scooped in the ground and
lined with a skin, and the cut ends of the leaves are placed on the skin
so that the juice exudes and collects. The thick juice is then heated,
and on cooling the “aloes” crystallise out.

_Aloe ferox_ is very common in parts of the south-eastern Cape Province
and in the midlands of Natal, and the plants form a very characteristic
feature in the landscape. Plants may reach a height of 8 to 12 feet, and
the simple stem is crowned with a dense rosette of leaves, while the
lower portion of the stem is covered with the remains of the leaves.

Our plate was prepared from a specimen flowering at the Division of
Botany, Pretoria.

DESCRIPTION:--_Stem_ simple. _Leaves_ many in a dense terminal rosette,
varying from 0·5 to 1 m. long, 10 to 15 cm. broad below and gradually
narrowing above, convex on the lower surface, concave on the upper
surface, prickly on the edges; prickles stout, slightly recurved.
_Inflorescence_ a terminal branched raceme. _Racemes_ up to 0·6 m. long,
very dense. _Bracts_ ovate, cuspidate. _Perianth-segments_ 1·3 cm. long,
8 mm. broad, oblong, cucullate at the apex. _Filaments_ linear; anthers
not much broader than the filaments. _Style_ cylindric, stigma simple.

     PLATE 169.--Fig. 1, leaf (× 1/8); Fig. 2, margin of leaf showing
     prickles; Fig. 3, cross-section of leaf; Fig. 4, bract; Fig. 5,
     flower bud; Fig. 6, mature flower; Fig. 7, perianth-segments; Fig.
     8, portion of inner and outer perianth-segments; Fig. 9, stamens,
     front and back view.

     F.P.S.A., 1925.
[Illustration: 170.]




PLATE 170.

LEUCADENDRON HUMIFUSUM.

_Cape Province._

PROTEACEAE. Tribe PROTEAE.

LEUCADENDRON, _R. Br._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 169.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Leucadendron humifusum=, _E. Mey. in Drege, Zwei. Pfl. Documente_,
pp. 64, 118, 198; _Fl. Cap._ vol. v. sect. i. p. 549.

       *       *       *       *       *

This interesting species of _Leucadendron_ was first collected by Drege
between the years 1826 and 1829, and then completely lost sight of, as
none of the later collectors are credited with finding it again. In
August, 1922, Mr. T. P. Stokoe came across the plant on the Hottentot
Holland Mountains, and thus had the honour of bringing to the notice of
South African botanists a species which had not been collected for
almost one hundred years. We take this opportunity of giving a fuller
description of the plant than that appearing in the _Flora Capensis_,
and describe the female plant for the first time.

DESCRIPTION:--A shrub. _Branches_ tomentose, at length becoming
glabrous. _Leaves_ 3·5 to 7 cm. long, 0·7 to 1·6 cm. broad (those
surrounding the heads a little larger), oblong or oblong-lanceolate,
with a blunt callous apex, slightly narrowed to a rather broad base,
with 3 distinct veins from above the base, glabrous. _Male head_
sessile, 2·5 to 3 cm. long (including the flowers), 2·5 cm. in diameter,
surrounded by about 8 series of involucral bracts. _Involucral bracts_
1·15 to 1·3 cm. long, 8 to 8·5 mm. broad, oblong, the outer shortly
cuspidate and with ciliated margins, inner rounded at the apex and
without cilia, all glabrous. _Receptacle_ 1 cm. high, 1 cm. in diameter,
club-shaped. _Perianth-tube_ 7 mm. long, somewhat compressed, glabrous;
lobes 8 mm. long, linear, obtuse at the apex, glabrous. _Anthers_ 5 mm.
long, linear. _Style_ 1·1 cm. long, terete, pilose below; stigma faintly
two-lobed. _Female-head_ 1·6 cm. long, 2 cm. in diameter, surrounded by
about 4 series of involucral bracts. _Involucral bracts_ 1·2 to 1·5 cm.
long, up to 1·4 cm. broad, ovate, shortly cuspidate, obtuse, the outer
ciliated, the inner without cilia, all glabrous. _Receptacle_ 1 cm.
high, 6 mm. broad, conical. _Perianth-tube_ 8 mm. long, compressed,
long-pilose; limb 2 mm. long, linear, obtuse, glabrous. _Staminodes_
0·75 mm. long. _Ovary_ 1 mm. long, 0·75 mm. in diameter, ellipsoid,
pilose; style 1 cm. long, linear, gradually narrowing to the base;
stigma flat and oblique.

     PLATE 170.--Fig. 1, female head; Fig. 2, bract; Fig. 3,
     longitudinal section of female head; Fig. 4, female flower; Fig. 5,
     pistil; Fig. 6, male head; Fig. 7, bract; Fig. 8, longitudinal
     section of male head; Fig. 9, male flower.

     F.P.S.A., 1925.
[Illustration: 171.]




PLATE 171.

ALOE MARLOTHII.

_Transvaal._

LILACEAE. Tribe ALOINEAE.

ALOE, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 776.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Aloe Marlothii=, _Berger in Engl. Bot. Jahrb._ vol. xxxviii. p. 87.

       *       *       *       *       *


_Aloe Marlothii_ is a very close ally of _A. ferox_ figured on Plate
169, but a careful comparison of the two will show points of difference
which enables one to distinguish the two species. The inflorescence in
_A. Marlothii_ has the primary branches horizontal and the flowers are
more or less on one side of the axis, and not arranged so as to form a
cylindric raceme, as in _A. ferox_. The leaves of the species also
differ, those of _A. Marlothii_ being concave-convex in cross-section
and with both the upper and lower surfaces bearing prickles, while in
_A. ferox_ the leaf is biconvex in cross-section.

Plants of _A. Marlothii_ up to 15 ft. high are often found, and they
make a very ornamental show in the rockery.

Our plate was prepared from specimens grown at the Division of Botany,
Pretoria.

DESCRIPTION:--_Leaves_ up to 1 m. long, ovate-lanceolate, acuminate,
acute, concave-convex in cross-section, prickly on the face and back,
with the margins armed with prickles. _Inflorescence_ a branched raceme,
with the primary branches horizontal. _Flowers_ more or less secund.
_Bracts_ broadly ovate, shortly acuminate. _Perianth_ tubular. _Stamens_
at length exserted. _Ovary_ ellipsoid, style cylindric, at length
exserted; stigma small.

     PLATE 171.--Fig. 1, plant, much reduced; Fig. 2, median
     longitudinal section of flower; Fig. 3, bract; Fig. 4, part of
     stamen; Fig. 5, pistil.

     F.P.S.A., 1925.
[Illustration: 172.]




PLATE 172.

HYPOXIS ROOPERI.

_Basutoland_, _Cape Province_, _Natal_, _Transvaal_.


AMARYLLIDACEAE. Tribe HYPOXIDEAE.

HYPOXIS, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 717.


       *       *       *       *       *

=Hypoxis Rooperi=, _Moore in Gard. Comp. 1_, 65, cum icone; _Fl. Cap._
vol. vi. p. 188.

       *       *       *       *       *

The accompanying plate is our first illustration of a characteristic
South African genus, namely, _Hypoxis_. The genus contains over sixty
species, of which number more than forty are found in the Union, the
remainder being natives of tropical Africa, tropical Asia, Australia and
America.

The species is acaulescent, with a large underground corm crowned with a
ring of bristles, and bears a number of distichous leaves. The
flower-stalks arise from the axils of the leaves.

It is quite a common plant in the south-eastern portion of the Cape
Province, and extends through East Griqualand into Natal and northwards
into the Drakensbergen round Barberton. It has, however, also been
recorded from the Potchefstroom District in the Transvaal.

In winter the leaves die down, but appear again as soon as the frosts
cease, and sometimes long before the summer rains commence the plants
are in full bloom in the veld.

Our plate was prepared from specimens flowering at the Division of
Botany, Pretoria.

DESCRIPTION:--_Leaves_ up to 30 cm. long, 3·2 cm. broad, strap-shaped,
narrowing upwards, falcate, folded from the midrib, closely and
distinctly ribbed, almost glabrous on the upper surface, softly pilose
on the back and margins. _Peduncles_ much shorter than the leaves,
villous. _Bracts_ 1·3 cm. long, linear, acute, villous on the back.
_Pedicels_ up to 1·6 cm. long, villous. _Outer perianth-segments_ 2·2
cm. long, 8 mm. broad, oblong, obtuse; inner segments 2·1 cm. long, 1·5
cm. broad, elliptic, obtuse. _Filaments_ shorter than the anthers.
_Ovary_ subglobose, villous, stigmas 3-lobed, papillose on the margins.

     PLATE 172.--Fig. 1, plant, much reduced; Fig. 2, portion of
     peduncle showing bracts and part of pedicels; Fig. 3, flower,
     surface view; Fig. 4, flower, back view; Fig. 5, anthers; Fig. 6,
     stigma, side and top views; Fig. 7, transverse section of ovary.

     F.P.S.A., 1925.
[Illustration: 173.]




PLATE 173.

CRASSULA COLUMNARIS.

_Cape Province._


CRASSULACEAE.

CRASSULA, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. i. p. 657.


       *       *       *       *       *

=Crossula columnaris=, _Linn. f. Suppl. 191_; _Fl. Cap._ vol. ii. p. 358.

       *       *       *       *       *

This quaint little _Crassula_ may be found in parts of the Karroo and
also in Namaqualand. It has on several occasions been collected in the
neighbourhood of Matjesfontein and Ceres. In its native home, where it
is usually exposed to the full force of the sun’s rays, it is far more
compact than is shown in our illustration, which was made from a plant
grown partly in the shelter of a tree. It is easily cultivated on the
rockery if not kept too moist, as an abundance of water causes the plant
to rot. It is a charming object when in flower, and growers of South
African succulents should certainly try to secure specimens of this
species, as in shape it is more or less unique in the genus _Crassula_.

Our plate was prepared from specimens presented by Mr. A. J. Austin of
Matjesfontein, and grown at the Division of Botany, Pretoria. We are
indebted to Dr. R. Marloth for a photograph of the plant as it grows,
and part of the plate has been prepared from this.

DESCRIPTION:--_Leaves_ 2·8 cm. broad, usually less than 1 cm. long,
deeply concave on the inner face. _Inflorescence_ a compact globose
head. _Calyx_ shortly campanulate at the base; lobes linear-spathulate,
fringed above with papillose hairs. _Corolla_ somewhat ventricose below,
tubular above; lobes linear-spathulate. _Stamens_ much shorter than the
corolla-lobes. _Hypogynous glands_ spathulate above, narrowed into a
long claw. _Carpels_ ventricose below, narrowed upwards, somewhat
recurved above.

     PLATE 173.--Fig. 1, a single leaf and cross-section of leaf; Fig.
     2, single flower; Fig. 3, corolla laid open showing the stamens;
     Fig. 4, calyx-lobe, much enlarged; Fig. 5, corolla-lobe, enlarged;
     Fig. 6, gynaecium, showing hypogynous glands.

     F.P.S.A., 1925.
[Illustration: 174.]




PLATE 174.

SENECIO TAMOIDES.

_Cape Province, Natal, Transvaal._

COMPOSITAE. Tribe SENECIONIDEAE.

SENECIO, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. ii. p. 446.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Senecis tamoides=, _DC. Prodr._ vol. vi. p. 403; _Fl. Cap._ vol. iii. p. 404.

       *       *       *       *       *


The species here figured belongs to a small group of species in the
genus (Section _Scandentes_), which is characterised by its members
being climbing, half-climbing or trailing plants. _Senecio tamoides_ is
a very common plant in the bush and the coastal belt, and its large
trusses of bright yellow, honey-scented flowers show up in strong
contrast against the background of dark green foliage. At Durban, Natal,
the flowers are frequently attacked by an insect, and as a result a gall
is formed inside the flower head. The gall enlarges into a cylindric
green body much longer than the flower-head, and each contains a single
larva.

_Senecio tamoides_ has been recorded from the Chipete Forest in
Rhodesia, and was also collected by Mr. E. E. Galpin, F.L.S., at
Barberton in the Transvaal.

Our illustration was made from specimens collected by Miss K. A.
Lansdell on the Berea, Durban.

DESCRIPTION:--A climbing herb. _Branches_ glabrous. _Leaves_ 2·2 to 5·5
cm. long, 2·7 to 6 cm. broad, ovate, acuminate, subobtuse, somewhat
hastate, with the margins acutely lobulate, glabrous. _Inflorescence_ a
many-headed corymb. _Involucral-bracts_ about 6, 8 mm. long, 2 mm.
broad, oblong-linear, obtuse, with membranous margins. _Ray-florets_:
_Tube_ 5 mm. long, cylindric; limb 6·5 mm. long, 2 mm. broad, oblong.
_Style_ exserted; style branches filiform. _Disc-florets_ male,
cylindric, 6·5 mm. long, lobes ·75 mm. long, linear, obtuse. _Anthers_
blunt. _Style-branches_ linear, truncate. _Ovary_ infertile, 3 mm. long,
cylindric, ribbed, glabrous. _Pappus_ copious.

     PLATE 174.--Fig. 1, ray-floret; Fig. 2, disc-floret.

     F.P.S.A., 1925.

[Illustration: 175.]




PLATE 175.

GLADIOLUS TRISTIS.

_Cape Province._

LILIACEAE. Tribe IXIEAE.

GLADIOLUS, _Linn.; Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 709.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Gladiolus tristis=, _Linn. Sp. Plant._ ed. 2, i. 53, ex parte; _Fl. Cap._
vol. vi. p. 139.

       *       *       *       *       *


There appears to be a great deal of confusion between this species of
_Gladiolus_ and _G. grandis_, even among the specimens quoted under
these species in the “Flora Capensis”; and possibly when a large range
of living specimens is examined the two species now upheld will be
referred to a single species. _Gladiolus tristis_ is quite a handsome
member of the genus, and while not so highly coloured as some, the large
semi-translucent flowers with such delicate markings have a charm of
their own; besides which, the flowers are very sweetly scented. The
species is readily raised from seed, and under proper cultivation it
flowers about fifteen months after sowing.

Our plate was made from plants grown by Dr. I. B. Pole Evans, C.M.G., at
Irene near Pretoria.

DESCRIPTION:--_Corm_ 1·5 cm. in diameter, globose. _Produced leaves_ 2
or 3; the lowest up to 36 cm. long, 4-angled, appearing as a cross in
transverse section, glabrous; upper leaves similar but shorter.
_Inflorescence_ usually 3-flowered. _Outer spathe-valves_ 3·5 cm. long,
lanceolate-oblong, acute; inner spathe-valve similar, but slightly
curved and gradually narrowing upwards; lobes 3·5 cm. long, 2·8 cm.
broad, ovate, bluntly acuminate, obtuse minutely apiculate. _Stamens_
shorter than the style. _Style-branches_ cuneate, papillose on the
margins.

     PLATE 175.--Fig. 1, plant, much reduced; Fig. 2, corm, showing
     bulbil; Fig. 3, median longitudinal section of flower; Fig. 4,
     portion of leaf; Fig. 5, cross-section of leaf; Fig. 6, anther with
     part of filament; Fig. 7, stigmae with part of style; Fig. 8,
     ovary.

     F.P.S.A., 1925.

[Illustration: 176.]




PLATE 176.

SARCOPHYTE SANGUINEA.

_Cape Province._

BALANOPHORACEAE. Tribe SARCOPHYTEAE.

SARCOPHYTE, _Sparrm._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 234.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Sarcophyte sanguinea=, _Sparrm. in Vet. Acad. Handl. Stockh. 1776_,
300, t. 7; _Fl. Cap._ vol. v. sect. ii. p. 213.

       *       *       *       *       *


The family _Balanophoraceae_, to which our plant belongs, comprises
plants all of which are parasitic on the roots of trees and shrubs.
There are about fifty species, spread over about fifteen genera, widely
distributed in tropical and sub-tropical regions. In South Africa the
family is represented by two genera and four species.

_Sarcophyte sanguinea_ is usually found as a parasite on the roots of
_Acacia Karroo_, but so far as we know does not follow the same
distribution as its host, but is confined to the eastern portion of the
Cape Province. The plant really consists of a large inflorescence
arising from the ground, and the two sexes are distinct. When in flower
it has a most objectionable stench, so much so that the presence of a
plant is known long before it is actually seen.

The accompanying plate illustrates a male plant.

DESCRIPTION:--Male plant about 30 cm. high. _Root-stock_ thick,
irregularly lobed, verrucose; stem short erect; leaves reduced to oblong
obtuse or subacute scales up to 2 cm. long and 1·2 cm. wide.
_Inflorescence_ much-branched; flowers usually in pairs on short
pedicels which are connate below. _Perianth-segments_ navicular, almost
patent, very thick and fleshy, subacute, 4 mm. long, 2·5 mm. wide;
filaments 3 to nearly 4 mm. long, cylindrical; anthers terminal,
scarcely wider than the filaments. Female plants very similar to the
male, but rather shorter, flowers numerous in subglobose shortly stalked
heads about 6 mm. in diameter. _Ovary_ 1-3-celled; ovule solitary,
pendulous; stigma discoid, sessile; fruit a syncarpium; seed about 1 mm.
long (_Flora Capensis_).

     PLATE 176.--Fig. 1, scale-like leaf; Fig. 2, portion of male
     inflorescence; Fig. 3, single male flower, showing the three
     perianth-segments and the 3 stamens; Fig. 4, single stamen.

     F.P.S.A., 1925.

[Illustration: 177.]




PLATE 177.

PROTEA PITYPHYLLA.

_Cape Province._

PROTEACEAE. Tribe PROTEAE.

PROTEA, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 169.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Protea pityphylla=, _Phillips in Kew Bulletin_, 1910, 234; _Fl. Cap._ vol. v.
sect. i. p. 594.

       *       *       *       *       *


We have pleasure in showing for the first time this species of _Protea_,
hitherto not figured in botanical publications. On a previous occasion
we published an illustration of a broad-leaved variety, _P. pityphylla_,
var. _latifolia_ (see Plate 108). Another variety with short leaves
resembling those of _P. rosacea_ has been collected in the Ronde
Bokkeveld, but it may be at once distinguished from this species by the
foliaceous appendages of the outer bracts.

The late Dr. MacOwan distributed the species as a “sp. nov.” in 1888,
and it is only within recent years that it has been at all largely
collected.

The species has been successfully cultivated at the National Botanic
Gardens, Kirstenbosch, and is well worth the attention of gardeners
interested in plants typically South African.

Our plate was prepared from specimens presented by Dr. R. Marloth.

DESCRIPTION:--_Branches_ glabrous; leaves 6 to 8 cm. long, about 1 mm.
wide, needle-shaped, acute, pungent, channelled and prominently costate
on the upper face, glabrous. _Head_, sessile, 4 to 4·5 cm. long, about
6·5 cm. in diameter, cernuous. _Involucral-bracts_ 7-seriate, glabrous;
outer ovate, acuminate, obtuse or acute, the lowest produced into long
foliaceous appendages resembling the leaves, inner oblong, slightly
concave, exceeding the flowers. _Perianth-sheath_ 1·5 cm. long, dilated,
3-keeled and 7-nerved below, scarious, rufously setulose within in the
upper part, otherwise glabrous; lip 5 mm. long, 3-toothed, 3-keeled,
setose below; teeth subequal, 0·5 mm. long. _Stamens_ all fertile;
filaments 0·5 mm. long, dilated, concave; anthers oblong-linear, 3 mm.
long, apical glands 0·25 mm. long, ovate, subacute, somewhat swollen on
the inner face. _Ovary_ 2 mm. long, obovate-oblong, covered with long
reddish-yellow hairs; hypogynous scales 1 mm. long, oval-oblong; style
up to 2·2 cm. long, widened and much compressed from the base upwards
for 6 mm., then much constricted and strongly bent and subulate, the
slender portion obliquely arching inwards, glabrous: stigma 3 mm. long,
obtuse (_Flora Capensis_).

     PLATE 177.--Fig. 1, single flower; Fig. 2, single flower opened;
     Fig. 3, lip of perianth-segments showing the three stamens; Fig. 4,
     receptacle.

     F.P.S.A., 1925.

[Illustration: 178.]




PLATE 178.

ALOE RUPESTRIS.

_Namaqualand._

LILIACEAE. Tribe ALOINEAE.

ALOE, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 776.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Aloe rupestris=, _Baker in Flora Capensis_, vol. vi. p. 326.

       *       *       *       *       *


This remarkable _Aloe_ belongs to the same section of the genus as _A.
ferox_, which we figured on Plate 169, but differs in having leaves
which are not prickly on the under surface. It is only found, so far as
we know, in Namaqualand, where it grows on rocky ground, and was first
distributed by MacOwan. The locality from which the original specimens
came was between Port Nolloth and Spektakel. The plant grows to a height
of 10 to 12 feet, and produces a large terminal panicle of racemes which
overtops the leaves. The young flowers are greenish-yellow in colour,
but become red when adult. This difference in colour between the young
and adult flowers is not an uncommon character in the genus, and we have
noted it before in _A. Wickensii_ (Plate 41).

The plant from which our plate was prepared was presented by Dr. R.
Marloth, and flowered at the Division of Botany, Pretoria, in September
1924.

DESCRIPTION:--_Stem_ almost 2 m. high, thick. _Leaves_ in a rosette at
the apex of the stem, up to 60 cm. long, 5 cm. broad near the base,
lanceolate-ovate, acuminate, not prickly on either side, with small
deltoid marginal teeth. _Inflorescence_ much-branched; racemes dense, 15
to 20 cm. long. _Bracts_ small. _Pedicels_ short. _Perianth_ over 2 cm.
long; segments divided almost to the base, oblong, with a distinct green
keel. _Stamens_ and _style_ much exserted.

     PLATE 178.--Fig. 1, plant, much reduced; Fig. 2, median
     longitudinal section of flower; Fig. 3, flowers in various stages
     of development; Fig. 4, stamen; Fig. 5, apex of style.

     F.P.S.A., 1925.

[Illustration: 179.]




PLATE 179.

SENECIO FULGENS.

_Natal, Transvaal._

COMPOSITAE. Tribe SENECIONIDEAE.

SENECIO, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. ii. p. 446.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Senecio fulgens=, _Nicholson Dict. Gard._ vol. iii. p. 420; Kleinia
fulgens, _Hook. Bot. Mag._ t. 5590.

       *       *       *       *       *


This species of _Senecio_ belongs to the section _Kelinoidei_ of the
genus, to which section _Senecio stapelliaeformis_, figured on Plate 28,
is also referred. The species was first introduced into England from
Natal by a Mr. Plant in 1886, and flowered at Kew the same year. From
these specimens the plate in the “Botanical Magazine” was made.

A comparison of the present plate with that of the “Botanical Magazine”
quoted above will show that our plant has a more lax habit, and this is
to be explained by the fact that it is growing under the shelter of a
large tree. The shape and dentition of the leaves vary considerably. The
young leaves are narrowly (1·5 cm.) lanceolate, while adult leaves are
broadly (4·5 cm.) obovate. Some of the leaves are quite entire, while
others are remotely toothed. All these variations are found on the same
plant. On young branches the leaves are grouped in more or less of a
rosette at the apex of the branch.

The species is well worthy of cultivation, as it grows luxuriantly and
flowers profusely, and often produces flowering stems over 30 cm. long.
The flowers are coral-red (R.C.S., Plate XIII).

DESCRIPTION:--A herbaceous shrub up to ·6 m. high. _Leaves_ more or less
crowded at the base, 6 to 12 cm. long, 1·5 to 4·5 cm. broad, lanceolate,
lanceolate-obovate to obovate, narrowed at the base, entire or remotely
toothed, glaucous, fleshy; the older leaves channelled on the upper
surface in the lower portion and distinctly keeled beneath. _Flowering
stems_ up to 30 cm. long, with scattered leaves 2 to 9 cm. apart, which
decrease in size upwards, usually simple. _Heads_ homogamous, solitary.
_Involucral-bracts_ 1·9 cm. long, concrete, forming a tube 1 cm. in
diameter and oblong in outline, produced into nine lanceolate lobes
above. _Receptacle_ slightly concave. _Corolla-tube_ 1·9 cm. long,
cylindric, very gradually widening upwards; lobes 2 mm. long, spreading,
ovate-oblong, obtuse. _Anthers_ blunt at the base, with a lanceolate
apical appendage. _Style-branches_ much recurved, obtuse, with marginal
papillae. _Ovary_ 5 mm. long, cylindric, glabrous. _Pappus_ 1·2 cm.
long, of many fine bristles. (National Herb., Pretoria, No. 2738.)

     PLATE 179.--Fig. 1, plant, much reduced; Fig. 2, cross-section of
     leaf; Fig. 3, longitudinal section of head; Fig. 4, median
     longitudinal section of flower; Fig. 5, anthers; Fig. 6, style;
     Fig. 7, fruit and pappus.

     F.P.S.A., 1925.

[Illustration: 180.]




PLATE 180.

ALOE SESSILIFLORA.

_Transvaal._

LILIACEAE. Tribe ALOINEAE.

ALOE, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 776.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Aloe sessiliflora=, _Pole Evans in Trans. Roy. Soc. S. Afr._ vol. v. p. 708.

       *       *       *       *       *


The species of _Aloe_ figured on the accompanying plate belongs to the
less conspicuous members of the genus. The small cream-yellow flowers do
not make the inflorescence very attractive. _Aloe sessiliflora_ was
collected in the Barberton District by Mr. J. E. Wickens, and flowered
at the Union Buildings for the first time in June and July of 1914. Mr.
Geo. Thorncroft subsequently collected the plant near Barberton. During
the winter months the leaves are of a distinct reddish colour, while in
summer they are bright green. The flowers contain drops of very dark
nectar at the base of the perianth.

Our plate was made from specimens growing at the Division of Botany,
Pretoria.

DESCRIPTION:--_Stem_ up to 90 cm. high. _Leaves_ in a dense rosette at
the apex of the stem, 45 to 60 cm. long. 6 to 8 cm. broad, spreading or
recurved, fleshy, channelled above, convex beneath, with the margins
toothed. _Peduncle_ simple, 60 to 75 cm. long, laterally compressed,
covered with numerous oblong brown bracts. _Spike_ densely
many-flowered, more or less cylindric; bracts 10 mm. long, 7 mm. wide,
ovate-cuspidate, 3-nerved. _Flowers_ campanulate-cylindric; perianth 14
mm. long; segments free; the outer 5 mm. broad, spathulate,
fleshy-coloured with three longitudinal dark nerves; the inner 8 mm.
broad, yellowish at the edges and with a reddish or greenish median
line. _Stamens_ and _style_ protruding 8 to 10 mm. beyond the perianth.
_Capsule_ 9 to 10 mm. long, cylindric-oblong, enclosed in the dry
peri-anth. _Seeds_ 3 mm. long, three-angled, greyish, very narrowly
winged. (National Herb., Pretoria, No. 2880.)

     PLATE 180.--Fig. 1, habit; Fig. 2, median section of flower; Fig.
     3, pistil; Fig. 4, stamen; Fig. 5, bract.

     F.P.S.A., 1925.
[Illustration: 181.]




PLATE 181.

STAPELIA GIGANTEA var. PALLIDA.

_Transvaal (?)._


ASCLEPIADACEAE. Tribe STAPELIEAE.

STAPELIA, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. ii. p. 784.


       *       *       *       *       *

=Stapelia gigantea=, _N.E. Br._ var. =Pallida=, _Phillips_ var. nov., a typo
corolla depressiore differt.

       *       *       *       *       *

The _Stapelia_ figured on the accompanying Plate is very near _S.
gigantea_, N.E. Br., from which it differs, however, in having the disc
portion of the corolla more depressed and being much lighter in colour.
It appears to be an intermediate form between this species and _S.
nobilis_, N.E. Br., differing from the latter species in not having such
a cup-shaped corolla-disc and not having the lobes of the outer corona
3-toothed. The locality in which the plant is found is not known, and
the specimen from which our Plate was prepared was kindly presented by
Dr. A. J. T. Janse, who grew it in his rockery.

Description:--_Stems_ robust, bright green, finely pubescent,
prominently ridged, with each ridge ending in a tooth-like leaf.
_Flowers_ solitary. _Pedicel_ 5 cm. long, terete, finely pubescent.
_Sepals_ 1·1 cm. long, lanceolate, acute, pubescent. _Corolla_ 25 cm. in
diameter when expanded; lobes 10 cm. long, 3 cm. broad at the base,
ovate, long-attenuate, pubescent without, transversely rugose and with
fine purple hairs on the inner face; disc shallowly depressed, covered
with long soft purple hairs. _Outer_ corona-lobes oblong; inner
corona-lobes deeply cleft, with the outer lobes plate-like and the inner
lobes linear. (National Herb., Pretoria, No. 2891.)

     PLATE 181.--Fig. 1, side view of flower; Fig. 2, corona; Fig. 3,
     cross-section through stem.

     F.P.S.A., 1925.
[Illustration: 182.]



PLATE 182.

GLADIOLUS CRUENTUS.

_Natal, Basutoland._


IRIDACEAE. Tribe IXIEAE.

GLADIOLUS, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 709.


       *       *       *       *       *

=Gladiolus cruentus=, _Moore in Gard. Chron._ 1868, 1138; _Bot. Mag._ t. 5810;
_Fl. Cap._ vol. vi. p. 157.

       *       *       *       *       *

This is the first opportunity we have had of figuring a species of
_Gladiolus_ belonging to the section Cardinales. As far as our records
go the species appears to be little known to botanical science. In 1868
a Mr. Bull flowered it in his nursery at Chelsea, and it was from
specimens supplied by Mr. Bull that the Plate in the _Botanical
Magazine_ was prepared. We are indebted to Mr. L. F. Wacher, who sent us
specimens from Basutoland in 1923, for information about this beautiful
plant. Mr. Wacher states that the plant grows in many places in the
mountain area of Basutoland, and it is probable that the species is
confined to the high mountain regions of Natal and Basutoland. While we
have no definite information as to the precise habitat, there appears to
be little doubt that it favours similar localities to _G. cardinalis_ of
the Cape Province, which is usually found growing near waterfalls.

DESCRIPTION:--_Corm_ 3·5 cm. in diameter, with thick cylindric roots.
_Leaves_ about four, 16 to 30 cm. long, 1·5 to 2·5 cm. broad, ensiform,
glabrous. _Spike_ few-flowered. _Spathe-valves_ large, lanceolate; the
lower from 7 to 15 cm. long. _Perianth-tube_ funnel-shaped, curved;
upper segments 5 to 6·5 cm. long, obovate-spathulate; lower segments
about 4 cm. long, with a white blotch at the throat covered with red
spots. _Style-branches_ papillose on the margins.

     PLATE 182.--Fig. 1, median longitudinal section of flower; Fig. 2,
     style showing the style-branches.

     F.P.S.A., 1925.
[Illustration: 183.]




PLATE 183.

GAZANIA SUFFRUTICOSA.

_S.W. Africa._


COMPOSITAE. Tribe ARCTOTIDEAE.

GAZANIA, _Gaertn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant_, vol. ii. p. 459.


       *       *       *       *       *

=Gazania suffruticosa=, _Muschler in Engl. Bot. Jahrb._ vol. 46, p. 120.

       *       *       *       *       *

In a collection of succulents received from South-West Africa and
planted at the Division of Botany, Pretoria, fruits of this _Gazania_
were evidently mixed with the soil, as a plant grew in the succulent
bed. It is a somewhat remarkable species and differs considerably in
habit from the two species previously figured on Plates 51 and 64. The
whole plant is covered with cobwebby hairs. The leaves are somewhat
succulent, extremely brittle, and snap when bent; they are also easily
snapped from the branches.

The single specimen in the garden has made vigorous growth and promises
to do well under cultivation. It flowered in May of this year.

DESCRIPTION:--A branched herb up to 30 cm. high. _Branches_ cobwebby.
_Leaves_ 5·5 to 7·5 cm. long, 1 to 1·5 cm. broad above,
obovate-spathulate, narrowed into a petiole, pungent at the apex,
irregularly lobed, or toothed, with the lobes and teeth tipped with a
short pungent mucro, cobwebby above and beneath. _Flower-heads_ in the
axils of the leaves. _Peduncles_ slightly longer, as long as or shorter
than the leaves with tufts of cobwebby hairs. _Involucre_ 1·8 cm. long,
6 mm. in diameter below, the concrete portion oblong in outline,
inflexed at the base, sparsely cobwebby; outermost lobes 2·5 to 4 mm.
long, ovate, acute; inner lobes 1 cm. long, ovate, acuminate, acute,
with membranous margin. _Ray-florets_ neuter; tube 9 mm. long, somewhat
compressed; limb 1·6 cm. long, 7 mm. broad, obovate-elliptic, yellow,
with a black eye-spot. _Disc-florets_: tube 7 mm. long, cylindric; lobes
1·5 mm. long, oblong, shortly acuminate, subobtuse. _Anthers_ minutely
sagittate at the base. _Ovary_ very villous; style-branches linear,
obtuse. _Pappus_ of many delicate very narrow scales 5 mm. long.

     PLATE 183.--Fig. 1, involucre; Fig. 2, longitudinal section through
     involucre; Fig. 3, ray-floret; Fig. 4, disc-floret.

     F.P.S.A., 1925.
[Illustration: 184.]




PLATE 184.

LACHENALIA RUBIDA var. TIGRINA.

_Cape Province._


LILIACEAE. Tribe SCILLEAE.

LACHENALIA, _Jacq._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 807.


       *       *       *       *       *

=Lachenalia rubida=, _Jacq._ var. =tigrina=, _Bkr. Fl. Cap._ vol. vi. p. 424.

       *       *       *       *       *

On Plate 158 we figured a species _Lachenalia pendula_ belonging to the
same subgenus (_Eulachenalia_) as the species here described.
_Lachenalia rubida_ is a graceful little plant, though not so handsome
as some species of the genus. It was figured by Jacquin between the
years 1786-1793, from plants cultivated in Europe, so that it has been
known for over 130 years to botanists.

The species appears to be confined to the Clanwilliam, Calvinia and van
Rhynsdorp Districts of the Cape Province, and as far as our records go
does not appear to have been frequently collected.

We are indebted to Mrs. E. Rood of van Rhynsdorp for the specimens from
which our Plate was prepared.

DESCRIPTION:--_Bulb_ 1·5 cm. in diameter at the base, ovoid, white.
_Produced leaves_ 1 or 2, as long or slightly longer than the naked
portion of the peduncle, with the free portion 1·8 to 2·2 cm. broad,
elliptic-oblong or ovate-oblong, obtuse, with dark brown blotches on a
dark green background, sometimes the spots absent, convolute and
clasping the peduncle for the greater portion of its length. _Peduncle_
with maroon-coloured spots on a yellowish background; in concolorus
leaves peduncle almost uniformly coloured. _Inflorescence_ 6-7-flowered.
_Bracts_ forming small pockets from which the flowers arise. _Pedicels_
3 mm. long. _Outer perianth-segments_ O·5 cm. shorter than the inner,
slightly gibbous at the base, thickly speckled with red spots on a
yellowish background; inner perianth-segments oblong, obtuse. _Stigma_
capitulate. (National Herb., Pretoria, No. 2901.)

     PLATE 184.--Fig. 1, median longitudinal section of a flower; Fig.
     2, single flower; Fig. 3, anthers; Fig. 4, pistil.

     F.P.S.A., 1925.
[Illustration: 185.]




PLATE 185.

PROTEA MUNDII.

_Cape Province._


PROTEACEAE. Tribe PROTEAE.

_Protea_, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 169.


       *       *       *       *       *

=Protea Mundii=, _Klotz in Otto and Dietr. Garten-Zeit._ 1838, 113; _Fl. Cap._
vol. v. sect. i. p. 579.

       *       *       *       *       *

The species of _Protea_ figured on the accompanying Plate represents a
member of the section _Exertae_ of the genus. This section comprises
four species which may be readily recognised by the fact that in the
mature head the perianth is spirally coiled in the open flowers, leaving
the style exserted. _Protea Mundii_ is closely related to another
species found in the same localities, viz. _P. lacticolor_, Salisb., and
the two were confused by E. Meyer, who named them both _P. penicillata_.
As will be seen from the illustration, the stigma is very distinctly
capitate at the apex, and as this character is unique in the genus the
species can be easily recognised.

The plant is found in the mountains round Worcester, extends into the
George, Knysna and Humansdorp Districts, and then passes through
Uitenhage and Stutterheim into the Transkei.

The specimens were collected by Dr. I. B. Pole Evans, C.M.G., in the
George District in July 1925.

DESCRIPTION:--Branches tomentellous to tomentose above. _Leaves_ 4 to 11
cm. long, 1·2 to 3·2 cm. broad, lanceolate or lanceolate-elliptic,
subobtuse, narrowing at the base, distinctly veined, glabrous or the
youngest leaves sometimes loosely pilose. _Head_ sessile, 7 to 8 cm.
long, about 5 cm. in diam. _Involucral-bracts_ 11-12-seriate; outer
ovate, obtuse, silky on the back, green, ciliate; inner oblong or
spathulate-oblong, whitish pubescent to tomentose, fringed with white
cilia, shorter than the styles; perianth-sheath 4 cm. long, slender and
thin above the middle, gradually dilated and 5-nerved below, not
keeled, the upper half at length coiled up, loosely hairy; lip 1·5 cm.
long, tridentate, glabrous, with a dense tuft of hairs at the apex;
lateral teeth 2 mm. long; median tooth 1·5 mm. long; stamens all
fertile; filaments 1 mm. long, channelled down the middle; anthers
linear, 6 mm. long; apical glands 0·5 mm. long, ovate, subacuminate,
subacute, keeled on the inner face; ovary covered with a tuft of long
brown hairs; style 5 cm. long, almost straight, keeled on one side,
compressed above the ovary, then more or less terete, glabrous; stigma 6
mm. long, furrowed, subcapitate at the apex, abruptly and obliquely
passing into the much stouter style. (National Herb., Pretoria, No.
2918.)

     PLATE 185.--Fig. 1, single flower; Fig. 2, receptacle.

     F.P.S.A., 1925.
[Illustration: 186.]




PLATE 186.

STRELITZIA REGINAE.

_Cape Province._


SCITAMINEAE. Tribe MUSEAE.

STRELITZIA, _Ait. in Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 656.


       *       *       *       *       *

=Strelitzia Reginae=, _Banks in Ait. Hort. Kew._ ed. 1, i. 285, t. 2; _Fl. Cap._
vol. v. sect. iii. p. 316.

       *       *       *       *       *

In 1792 this plant was figured in the _Botanical Magazine_, (Plate 119),
but had previously been figured by Sir Joseph Banks. _Strelitzia
Reginae_, which was introduced into the Royal Gardens at Kew in 1773,
excited a considerable amount of interest when it flowered. In the
number of the _Botanical Magazine_ quoted above a double Plate was
devoted to the illustration of the flowers so as to give “readers an
opportunity of seeing a coloured representation of one of the most
scarce and magnificent plants introduced into this country.” That the
plant is a particularly handsome one there can be no doubt and it has
been appropriately named the “Bird-of-paradise flower”; the Afrikaans
name is “Gele piesang.” The species is native of the south-eastern and
eastern districts of the Cape Province.

The specimen illustrated on the accompanying Plate was grown at the
Division of Botany, Pretoria.

The following description is taken mainly from the _Flora Capensis_.

DESCRIPTION:--Stemless; leaves oblong-lanceolate, acute, cuneate at the
base, up to 0·5 m. long and 10 cm. wide, entire, undulate, especially in
the lower part, quite glabrous, bright green above, glaucescent beneath;
petiole up to 1·25 m. long; peduncle as long as the petiole. _Bracts_
tubular, oblique and acute at the mouth, uppermost one cymbiform,
acuminate, up to 20 cm. long, green, edged with purple. _Sepals_
lanceolate, 7 to 10 cm. long, orange-yellow. _Petals_ dark blue, blade
of the lower two 5 cm. long, with a rounded basal auricle; claw 2·5 cm.
long; upper petal ovate, 2·5 cm. long. _Stamens_ reaching to the top of
the longer petals; anthers narrowly linear, twice as long as the
filaments; style exserted, with 3 linear branches 2·5 cm. long. _Fruit_
a capsule; seeds covered with reddish woolly hairs. (National Herb.,
Pretoria, No. 2915.)

     PLATE 186.--Fig. 1, plant much reduced; Fig. 2, median longitudinal
     section of a flower.

     F.P.S.A., 1925.
[Illustration: 187.]




PLATE 187.

ALOE ARBORESCENS var. FRUTESCENS.

_Transvaal._


LILIACEAE. Tribe ALOINEAE.

ALOE, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant_, vol. iii. p. 776.


       *       *       *       *       *

=Aloe arborescens=, _Miller, Gard. Chron._ ed. viii. No. 3; var. =frutescens=,
_Bkr. Fl. Cap._ vol. vi. p. 322.

       *       *       *       *       *

This _Aloe_ is widely distributed along the eastern mountain range and
is known to extend northwards as far as the Victoria Falls. The many
stems which grow together give the plant a bush-like appearance which
makes a very effective display in a large rockery, and it has the
advantage over many other species of the genus in that the inflorescence
is not nipped by a severe frost. The species also lends itself admirably
to growing on rough stone pillars forming an entrance to a drive.

Our specimen was collected on the hills near Haenertsburg on the
Drakensbergen in June 1914, and cultivated at the Division of Botany,
Pretoria.

DESCRIPTION:--An arborescent branched shrub. _Leaves_ up to 0·5 m. long,
about 4 cm. broad at the base, gradually tapering to the apex, almost
flat on the upper surface, convex on the lower surface, with ovate
somewhat incurved teeth 1 cm. apart below, about 1·3 cm. apart above,
glabrous. _Inflorescence_ solitary or 2-3 from each rosette of leaves,
unbranched. _Peduncle_ 7 mm. in diameter, cylindric with scattered
membranous bracts. _Floral-bracts_ membranous, 1·3 cm. long, 9 mm.
broad, oblong, with straight margins, distinctly veined. _Pedicels_ 2
cm. long, elongating in the old flowers. _Raceme_ dense, up to 22 cm.
long. _Young flowers_ erect-spreading, cylindric, with a subacute apex;
old flowers pendulous. _Perianth_ (in open flowers) 3·2 cm. long; outer
segments reddish, 5 mm. broad, obtuse; inner segments white, 9 mm.
broad, with a distinct mid-rib, reddish below, greenish above, obtuse.
_Stamens_ projecting. _Ovary_ 8 mm. long, cylindric; style 3·2 cm. long,
cylindric; stigma minute. (National Herb., Pretoria, No. 2904.)

     PLATE 187.--Fig. 1, young and adult flowers; Fig. 2, median
     longitudinal section of a flower; Fig. 3, pistil; Fig. 4, bract.

     F.P.S.A., 1925.
[Illustration: 188.]




PLATE 188.

DERMATOBOTRYS SAUNDERSII.

_Cape Province, Natal._


SCROPHULARIACEAE.

DERMATOBOTRYS, _Bolus in Hook. Ic._ Pl. 1940.


       *       *       *       *       *

=Dermatobotrys Saundersii=, _Bolus in Hook. Ic._ Pl. Zwilt’s 1940; _Fl. Cap._ vol. iv.
sect. ii. p. 206.

       *       *       *       *       *

This interesting member of the _Scrophulariaceae_ is peculiar in that it
grows as an epiphyte on other trees. Miss Pegler records it from the
Kentani District as growing on the Cape Chestnut (_Calodendron
capense_). It ranges from Kentani to Zululand. It differs also from most
members of the family in having 5 well-developed stamens, and for this
reason was first referred to the family _Solanaceae_, but the straight
or almost straight embryo indicates an affinity with the family
_Scrophulariaceae_.

Mr. Saunders, who first collected the plant, described it as a parasite
which killed the host on which it grew, but the late Dr. Medley Wood
states that the plant has a tendency to fix itself to trees already
dead.

We are indebted to Mr. K. B. Jameson, Scottsville, Maritzburg, for the
specimen from which our illustration was prepared.

DESCRIPTION:--A glabrous epiphytic shrub; root-stock 1·25 m. high, about
1 cm. thick but increasing towards the top to 5 cm., furrowed
transversely as in a _Dahlia_ root; rootlets fibrous; stems more or less
quadrangular; ultimate branchlets 1·5 to 3 mm. thick. _Leaves_ opposite,
decussate, ovate or elliptical, acute or broadly pointed at the apex,
more or less narrowed at the entire base, strongly toothed or
repand-dentate, fleshy, red-veined, turning black-green in the dried
state, 5 to 15 cm. long, 2·5 to 9 cm. broad; petioles 1 to 5 cm. long.
_Flowers_ clustered at the nodes on the branchlets, usually three
together, bracteate at the base, about 4 cm. long; peduncles 1 to 3 mm.
long, spreading; bract elliptic-linear, acute at both ends, about 2 cm.
long, 5 mm. broad; calyx-segments lanceolate, acute, glabrous, 3 to 5
mm. long. _Corolla_ red; tube beset inside towards the base with stiff
broad white hairs; lobes about 5 mm. long; anthers glabrous; style
glabrous, slender, tapering towards the stigma. _Ovary_ ovoid-conical,
glabrous; ripe berry ovoid, blunt, smooth, about 2 cm. long, 1·8 cm.
broad, green; embryo about 1/3 to 3/4 of the seed in length. (National
Herb., Pretoria, No. 2917.)

     PLATE 188.--Fig. 1, single flower; Fig. 2, median longitudinal
     section of flower; Fig. 3, pistil.

     F.P.S.A., 1925.
[Illustration: 189.]




PLATE 189.

CRASSULA LATICEPHALA.

_Cape Province._


CRASSULACEAE.

CRASSULA, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant_, vol. i. p. 657.


       *       *       *       *       *

=Crassula laticephala=, _Schonl. in Rec. Albany Mus._ vol. ii. p. 457.

       *       *       *       *       *

The dwarf _Crassula_ figured on the accompanying Plate was described by
Dr. S. Schonland in 1913 from a specimen collected in the Riversdale
District by Mr. J. E. A. Volschenk. The species is closely allied to _C.
congesta_, N.E.Br., which we figured on Plate 115, and Dr. Schonland
suggests that when more material is available it might be considered a
variety of the latter species.

_Crassula laticephala_ is confined, so far as we know, to the Riversdale
District, and there only found in the Klein Karroo. We are indebted to
Dr. J. Muir of Riversdale for the specimen figured.

DESCRIPTION:--A dwarf succulent 4·5 cm. high. _Leaves_ fleshy, 4-ranked,
strongly reflexed, 3 cm. long, 1·2 cm. broad at the base, ovate,
acuminate, obtuse, flat above with a distinct keel, somewhat convex
beneath, scurfy. _Flowers_ in heads 2·5 to 3 cm. in diameter surrounded
by floral-leaves. _Floral-leaves_ 1·2 cm. long, 1·5 cm. broad at the
base, ovate, suddenly contracted into a fleshy cylindric appendage.
_Receptacle_ convex. _Floral-bracts_ 4·5 mm. long, linear, ciliated.
_Caylx-lobes_ 3 mm. long, linear, cucullate at the apex, ciliate.
_Petals_ 5·5 mm. long, linear, slightly broadened below, concave.
_Filaments_ 1 mm. long, slender; anthers 1·25 mm. long, oblong.
_Carpels_ 2 mm. long. _Hypogynous scales_ transversely oblong, on
distinct stalks. (National Herb., Pretoria, No. 2936.)
     PLATE 189.--Fig. 1, flower-bud; Fig. 2, petal with 2 stamens; Fig.
     3, carpels; Fig. 4, longitudinal section of head showing convex
     receptacle; Fig. 5, cross-section through leaf; Fig. 6, leaf.

F.P.S.A., 1925.
[Illustration: 190.]




PLATE 190.

HAEMANTHUS ALBIFLOS.

_Cape Province._


AMARYLLIDACEAE. Tribe AMARYLLEAE.

HAEMANTHUS, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 730.


       *       *       *       *       *

=Haemanthus albiflos=, _Jacq. Hort. Schoenbr._ i. 31, t. 59; _Fl. Cap._ vol. vi.
p. 235.

       *       *       *       *       *

This species of _Haemanthus_ was known to European horticulturists
almost 150 years ago and was first shown in colour by Jacquin in 1797.
In the _Botanical Magazine_ it was again figured in 1810 (Plate 1239)
from plants which flowered in the greenhouse of Messrs. Lee and Kennedy
of Hammersmith. The plant has been recorded from the Uitenhage, Graaf
Reinet and Somerset East Divisions of the Cape Province, but does not
appear to have been extensively collected. In general habit _H.
albiflos_ resembles _H. natalensis_ figured in Plate 32, but the leaves
are thicker and more fleshy.

The species responds well to proper cultivation and has been
successfully grown at the Division of Botany, Pretoria. It was from
plants grown at Pretoria that our Plate was prepared.

DESCRIPTION:--_Bulb_ tunicated, 4·5 cm. in diameter; tunics fleshy,
white becoming green. _Leaves_ 4, contemporary with the flowers, 42 to
46 cm. long, 10 cm. broad at the widest part, tongue-shaped, obtuse,
narrowed to the base, with ciliated margins, dark green on the upper
surface, paler on the lower surface. _Peduncle_ 16 cm. long, 1·3 cm. in
diameter, erect, compressed, glabrous. _Inflorescence_ a dense umbel,
2·5 cm. in diameter. _Involucral-bracts_ 5, ascending, white with 6 to 9
distinct green nerves, short mucronate, ciliated with reflexed hairs.
_Pedicels_ 4 to 5 mm. long, glabrous. Flowers white. _Perianth-tube_
subcylindric, glabrous; segments 1·7 cm. long, linear, obtuse. _Stamens_
6; filaments subulate; anthers versatile. _Ovary_ globose, 3 mm. in
diameter; style subulate; stigma minutely tricuspidate. (National Herb.,
Pretoria, No. 2933.)

     PLATE 190.--Fig. 1, whole plant, much reduced; Fig. 2, single
     flower; Fig. 3, involucral bract.

     F.P.S.A., 1925.
[Illustration: 191.]




PLATE 191.

CEROPEGIA HAYGARTHII.

_Natal, Cape Province._


ASCLEPIADACEAE. Tribe CEROPEGIEAE.

CEROPEGIA, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. ii. p. 779.


       *       *       *       *       *

=Ceropegia Haygarthii=, _Schltr. in Engl. Bot.
Jahrb._ vol. xxxviii. 46, fig. 7 A;
_Fl. Cap._ vol. v. sect. i. p. 813.

       *       *       *       *       *

This beautiful species of _Ceropegia_ is almost unique in the genus on
account of the peculiar formation of the corolla-lobes. The illustration
should be compared with those given on Plates 39, 44 and 143, and the
striking differences will then be seen. It is closely related to _C.
tristis_, Hutch. described on Plate 44, but the corolla-lobes are
produced into a much longer cylindric portion and the calyx-lobes are
longer.

The specimen from which our illustration was made flowered in the
greenhouse at the Division of Botany in July 1925, and like the other
species of the genus always attracts attention owing to the peculiar
shape of the flowers.

DESCRIPTION:--_Stem_ climbing, fleshy, 3 to 4 mm. thick, glabrous.
_Leaves_ small, fleshy, flat, 0·6 to 3·5 cm. long, 0·3 to 2·5 cm. broad,
ovate or ovate-lanceolate, acuminate. _Cymes_ 1-2-flowered, lateral at
the nodes. _Peduncles_ 2 to 4 cm. long, glabrous. _Bracts_ 2 to 4 mm.
long, subulate. _Pedicels_ 1 to 1·4 cm. long, glabrous. _Sepals_ 1 cm.
(0·5 cm., _Schlechter_) long, subulate, glabrous. _Corolla_ abruptly
bent at a right angle near the base. _Tube_ (following the bend) about
3·5 cm. long, according to a drawing, or about 2·5 cm. long in dried
flowers, globosely inflated at the base, cylindric above, enlarging
(according to a drawing) to about 2 cm. in diam. at the mouth,
pinkish-white or greenish tinted, spotted with violet, glabrous outside,
pilose with very fine long hairs within. _Lobes_ free at the base,
abruptly inflexed over the mouth of the tube and produced beneath into
broad triangular partition-like green plates or keels, meeting at the
centre and connate into a slender erect column 1 to 1·4 cm. long, then
again becoming free and expanding into elliptic-lanceolate replicate
segments connate at the tips, forming a small apical ellipsoid cage-like
body 5 to 6 mm. long, ciliate on the margins, dull purple or
purple-brown. _Corona_ in the flowers seen much eaten by insects, but
apparently the outer corona is cupular, with 5 acutely bifid lobes
rising to the level of the top of the staminal column, ciliate and hairy
within with long fine hairs. _Inner_ corona-lobes 2 mm. long, linear or
linear-spathulate, connivent-erect over the staminal column, with very
revolute tips. (_Fl. Cap._--National Herb., Pretoria, No. 2932.)

     PLATE 191.--Fig. 1, calyx; Fig. 2, ground plan of corolla from
     above; Fig. 3, terminal portion of corolla lobes; Fig. 4, corona.

     F.P.S.A., 1925.
[Illustration: 192.]




PLATE 192.

PROTEA HARMERI.

_Cape Province._


PROTEACEAE. Tribe PROTEAE.

PROTEA, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 169.


       *       *       *       *       *

=Protea Harmeri=, _Phillips in Kew Bulletin 1911_, p. 83; _Fl. Cap._ vol. v.
sect. i. p. 593.

       *       *       *       *       *

A comparison of the accompanying Plate should be made with the
illustration on Plate 108. Both the species figured belong to the same
section of the genus _Protea_, all characterised by very narrow leaves.

_Protea Harmeri_ was first found by Dr. (now Sir Sydney) Harmer on a
hill near Matjesfontein when he visited South Africa in 1905; it was
subsequently collected by Dr. R. Marloth on the Wittebergen and again
later in the Zwartberg Pass between Oudtshoorn and Prince Albert. The
specimen figured was collected near the summit of the Zwartberg Pass in
July 1925. The plant is a bush about 6 ft. high and is extremely
handsome, as the dark heads show up in strong relief from the
greyish-green leaves.

DESCRIPTION:--A bush about 1 m. high. _Branches_ greyish tomentellous
above, becoming glabrous. _Leaves_ 4·5 to 6·5 cm. long, 2·5 to 3·5 mm.
broad, linear, obtuse to subacute with a callous point attenuated at the
base, margins recurved; youngest leaves finely villous at the base.
_Head_ sessile, 2·5 cm. long, about 2·5 cm. in diam., globose;
receptacle convex. _Involucral-bracts_ 10-11-seriate; outer ovate,
obtuse, glabrous or the lowest very finely pubescent, with membranous
ciliate margins; inner oblong-spathulate, obtuse, brick-red, recurved
above, glabrous or minutely pubescent, not equalling the styles.
_Perianth-sheath_ 1·5 cm. long, 0·75 mm. broad, dilated above, 3-keeled
and 3-nerved below, glabrous or hirsute at the apex; lip 4 mm. long,
3-toothed, rufously setulose, glabrescent on the back; teeth subequal,
0·25 mm. long, the middle one smaller. _Stamens_ all fertile,
subsessile; anthers linear, 3 mm. long; apical glands 0·25 mm. long,
ovate, obtuse, swollen on the inner face. _Ovary_ 2 mm. long,
oblong-obovate in outline, covered with long brown hairs; hypogynous
scales 1 mm. long, 0·25 to 0·5 mm. broad, oblong, obtuse; style 2 cm.
long, falcate, arching over the centre of the head, terete above,
flattened and hollow below, glabrous; stigma 2·25 mm. long, linear,
obtuse, grooved, passing into the style. (_Fl. Cap._--National Herb.,
Pretoria, No. 2916.)

     PLATE 192.--Fig. 1, single flower; Fig. 2, posterior perianth lobe;
     Fig. 3, pistil; Fig. 4, receptacle.

     F.P.S.A., 1925.
[Illustration: 193.]




PLATE 193.

SUTHERLANDIA FRUTESCENS.

_Cape Province, Orange Free State, Natal, Transvaal._


LEGUMINOSAE. Tribe GALEGEAE.

SUTHERLANDIA, _R.Br._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. i. p. 503.


       *       *       *       *       *

=Sutherlandia frutescens=, _R.Br. Hort. Kew_. ed. 2, p. 327; _Fl. Cap._ vol. ii.
p. 212.

       *       *       *       *       *

This plant was named by the great English botanist in honour of James
Sutherland, one of the earliest superintendents of the Edinburgh Botanic
Gardens. The genus has only one species, which is widely distributed
throughout South Africa, and is probably the most handsome native plant
in the family _Leguminosae_. According to the _Botanical Magazine_, in
which the plant was figured (Plate 181), _Sutherlandia frutescens_ was
known in cultivation as early as 1683, and later became generally known
in European gardens.

_Sutherlandia frutescens_ forms a small bush, but may grow to 3-4 ft.
high, and is found usually in fairly dry places. It is known under
several local names, but probably the most common is “Kanker bos”
(cancer-bush), as it is reputed to be a cure for cancer.

As the plant is easily raised from seed, and the flowers are
particularly beautiful, it should be more generally cultivated.

We are indebted to Mr. C. A. Smith, B.Sc., for the specimens which he
collected at Fauresmith in the Orange Free State.

DESCRIPTION:--A shrub. _Branches_ pubescent, at length becoming
glabrous. _Leaves_ 6 to 9 cm. long, imparipinnate; leaflets alternate or
opposite, 1 to 2 cm. long, 3 to 6 mm. broad, lanceolate or oblong,
obtuse, thinly pubescent. _Inflorescence_ an axillary raceme, peduncle
and pedicels covered with short stiff sparse hairs. _Floral-bracts_ 3
mm. long, oblong. _Pedicels_ 1·2 cm. long. _Calyx-tube_ 1 cm. long,
deeply campanulate; lobes 4·5 mm. long, ovate, acuminate. _Vexillum_ 3
cm. long, 1·2 cm. broad, obovate, acuminate; alae 8 mm. long, 1·5 mm.
broad, oblong, obliquely clawed; keel 3·5 cm. long, 8 mm. broad, more or
less oblong, with a linear claw 1·2 cm. long. _Stamens_ diadelphous;
filaments filiform. _Ovary_ stalked, 1·5 cm. long, linear, with many
ovules; style 1·5 cm. long, bearded on the inner face. _Pod_ membranous,
inflated. (National Herb., Pretoria, No. 2943.)

     PLATE 193.--Fig. 1, median longitudinal section of flower.

     F.P.S.A., 1925.
[Illustration: 194.]




PLATE 194.

ORNITHOGALUM ODORATISSIMUM.

_Cape Province._


LILIACEAE. Tribe SCILLEAE.

ORNITHOGALUM, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 815.


       *       *       *       *       *

=Ornithogalum odoratissimum= _C. A. Smith_, sp. nov. _Bulbus_ ovoideo-globosus,
2 cm. diam., tunicis brunneis membranaceis. _Folia_ 2-6, 6-10
cm. longa, anguste linearia, basi leviter dilatata, glabra. _Pedunculus_
ad 14 cm. longus, cylindricus, glaber. _Inflorescentia_ ad 6 cm. longa,
pauci-vel multiflora. _Bracteae_ 1-1·8 cm. longae, ovato-acuminatae,
membranaceae. _Pedicelli_ 0·5-1 cm. longi, teretes. _Segmenta perianthii_
1·5 cm. longa, oblonga, apice inflexa pubescentia obtusa. _Filamenta_
0·5-1 cm. longa, basi 2 mm. lata; antherae oblongae. _Ovarium_ 5 mm.
longum, sessile. _Stylus_ 1·5 cm. longus, teres, apice minute capitatus,
penicillatus. _Fructus_ trigonus.

       *       *       *       *       *

This Plate should be compared with that of _O. Roodeae_ figured on Plate
75, as the two species are no doubt closely related though differing
much in the colour of the flowers and the shape of the leaves. Like _O.
Roodeae_ the flowers are very sweet-scented, a character not usually met
with in the genus, and a single inflorescence is sufficient to saturate
a large room with a pleasant scent, and even when planted out in the
garden the strong perfume is noticeable for a considerable distance from
the plant. The plant has been compared with Jacquin’s figure of _O.
suaveolens_, from which it differs in being much smaller, and as it has
been figured it was thought better to describe it than to definitely
state that it is _O. suaveolens_.

We are indebted to Mrs. E. Rood of van Rhynsdorp for the specimens.

DESCRIPTION:--A simple erect herb. _Bulb_ 2 cm. in diameter, 2·5 cm.
high, ovoid, with brown tunics. _Leaves_ 2 to 6, 6 to 10 cm. long, 2 to
3 cm. broad at the base, linear to linear-lanceolate, deeply channelled,
glabrous. _Peduncle_ up to 14 cm. long, terete, glabrous. _Raceme_ few
to many-flowered, up to 6 cm. long. _Bracts_ 1 to 1·8 cm. long,
ovate-acuminate, membranous, dry, partly sheathing the pedicels.
_Pedicels_ 0·5 to 1 cm. long, cylindric, erect-spreading.
_Perianth-segments_ 1·5 cm. long, oblong, inflexed obtuse and pubescent
at the apex, white with a broad green 3-nerved band. _Stamens_ slightly
shorter than the perianth-segments; filaments 2 mm. broad at the base;
anthers 2 mm. long, oblong, versatile. _Ovary_ 5 mm. long, sessile;
style subequalling the perianth-segments, sub-capitate and penicillate
at the apex. _Fruit_ (immature) deeply and bluntly 3-lobed. (National
Herb., Pretoria, No. 2941.)

     PLATE 194.--Fig. 1, median longitudinal section of flower; Fig. 2,
     cross-section of ovary.

     F.P.S.A., 1925.
[Illustration: 195.]




PLATE 195.

ATHRIXIA ELATA.

_Basutoland, Cape Province, Natal, O.F.S., Transvaal._


COMPOSITAE. Tribe INULOIDEAE.

ATHRIXIA, _Ker._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant_, vol. ii. p. 328.


       *       *       *       *       *

=Athrixia elata=, _Sond. in Linn._ vol. xxiii. p. 67; _Fl. Cap._ vol. iii. p. 292.

       *       *       *       *       *

The plant figured on the accompanying Plate is a much-branched shrub
almost 1 m. high, and may be found in flower on the hills surrounding
Pretoria during the month of August. It grows in masses in certain
localities and flowers very profusely; if brought under cultivation it
could no doubt be much improved so as to make it a desirable garden
plant.

_Athrixia elata_ is found on the Drakensberg in Natal, in Basutoland,
the eastern Free State and on the spurs of the Drakensberg in the
northern Transvaal, but extends westwards in the Transvaal as far as
Rustenburg. The travellers Burke and Zeyher collected specimens almost
100 years ago on the Magaliesberg, and Cooper also came across the plant
in his journey through Basutoland in 1861.

We are indebted to Mr. C. A. Smith, B.Sc., for the specimens from which
our Plate was prepared.

DESCRIPTION:--A much-branched shrub. _Leaves_ alternate, sessile, 0·5 to
2·5 cm. long, linear, acute, pungent, with revolute margins, glabrous
above, woolly beneath. _Heads_ subsessile, solitary, terminal, 2·5 to 3
cm. in diameter (including the rays). _Involucral-bracts_ in many rows,
unequal; the outer gradually shorter, recurved, aristate, 3 to 4 mm.
long, 1 mm. broad, narrowly ovate with the apices edged with brown to
black, woolly; inner 5 to 6 mm. long, 1 mm. broad, linear-oblong;
innermost 7 to 8·5 mm. long, 0·5 to 1 mm. broad, narrow-linear to
oblong-elliptic, with membranous margins. _Receptacle_ flat, nude,
honeycombed with the margins of the cells evident. _Ray-florets_ female;
tube 4 to 5 mm. long, cylindric, widening above, glabrous; lamina
oblong-elliptic. _Ovary_ terete, pilose; style cylindric, glabrous,
deeply 2-cleft. _Disc-florets_ hermaphrodite, fertile. _Corolla_ 6 mm.
long, tubular, cylindric below, then articulated and the uppermost
one-third slightly wider, glabrous. _Anthers_ tailed at the base, with
an ovate obtuse apical appendage. _Ovary_ pilose; style cylindric,
glabrous, deeply 2-cleft; branches 1 mm. long, linear, truncate,
penicillate. _Pappus-bristles_ equalling the corolla-tube, rigid,
persistent, subplumose in the uppermost one-third, alternating with
minute serrulate scales. (National Herb., Pretoria, 2942.)

     PLATE 195.--Fig. 1, diagrammatic longitudinal section of head; Fig.
     2, ray-floret; Fig. 3, disc-floret; Fig. 4, involucral-bract; Fig.
     5, pappus enlarged; Fig. 6, pappus-bristle; Fig. 7, fimbriated
     pappus-scale.

     F.P.S.A., 1925.
[Illustration: 196.]




PLATE 196.

SUTERA BURKEANA.

_Transvaal, Zululand._


SCROPHULARIACEAE. Tribe _Manuleae_.

SUTERA, _Roth._ (including _Lyperia_, Benth.); _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._
vol. ii. p. 945.


       *       *       *       *       *

=Sutera Burkeana=, _Hiern. Fl. Cap._ vol. iv. sect. ii. p. 299.

       *       *       *       *       *

The _Sutera Burkeana_ here figured for the first time is a common plant
in some localities around Pretoria and is to be found in flower from the
beginning of August onwards. It is a bush up to 2-1/2 ft. high and
appears to be very localised in its distribution, as only isolated
patches are met with on the hills surrounding Pretoria. It has also been
recorded from the neighbourhood of Johannesburg and from Zululand.

The plant flowers profusely, and when in full bloom makes a fine display
and would no doubt be improved under proper cultivation.

Our Plate was prepared from specimens collected by Mr. C. A. Smith near
Pretoria.

DESCRIPTION:--A much-branched shrub ·3 to 1·3 m. high. _Branches_
glandular-puberulous. _Leaves_ fascicled recurved 3 to 8 mm. long,
linear to oblong, cuneate at the base, acute, toothed, punctate.
_Flowers_ arranged racemosely at the ends of the branches. _Pedicels_ 7
mm. long, terete, rigid, viscid-puberulous. _Calyx_ 3 to 4 mm. long,
deeply 5-lobed; lobes lanceolate-linear or oblong-lanceolate, acute,
glandular-hairy. _Corolla-tube_ cylindric, somewhat swollen and twice
curved above, glandular-hairy without, softly hairy in the throat; lobes
broadly obovate, obtuse, entire, often curled or recurved,
glandular-hairy outside. _Stamens_ 4, hardly exserted; filaments
filiform, inserted on the corolla-tube. _Anthers_ 1-thecous, all
perfect. _Ovary_ 2-chambered with numerous ovules; style subulate,
included; stigma obtuse. _Fruit_ a capsule; valves cleft at the apex.
_Seeds_ numerous, regose. (National Herb., Pretoria, No. 2937.)

     PLATE 196.--Fig. 1, longitudinal section of flower; Fig. 2, pistil;
     Fig. 3, cross-section of ovary.

     F.P.S.A., 1925.
[Illustration: 197.]




PLATE 197.

EUPHORBIA TRIDENTATA.

_Cape Province._


EUPHORBIACEAE. Tribe EUPHORBIEAE.

EUPHORBIA, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 258.


       *       *       *       *       *

=Euphorbia tridentata=, _Lam. Encycl._ ii. 416; _Fl.
Cap._ vol. v. sect. ii. p. 298.

       *       *       *       *       *

The species of _Euphorbia_ figured on the accompanying Plate is a
somewhat rare plant and until quite recently it was not known where the
plant was found, although it was known in European gardens and figured
almost 100 years ago. The plant belongs to a small group of three
species in the genus characterised by having the branches constricted at
their origin of growth. All of them are very dwarf plants.

We are indebted to Mr. H. M. Bartlett of Riversdale for the specimens
which he sent in July 1924, and these were successfully grown at the
Division of Botany, Pretoria, and flowered in September 1925.

DESCRIPTION:--Plant dwarf, succulent, spineless, branching from the
base. _Branches_ ascending or somewhat spreading, 2·5 to 15 cm. long, 1
to 1·4 cm. thick, cylindric or slightly tapering upwards, tessellately
tuberculate with hexagonal flattish tubercles 6 to 10 mm. in diam.,
having a slightly prominent whitish leaf-scar, glabrous, dull green.
_Leaves_ sessile, soon deciduous, 4 to 6 mm. long, 3 to 4 mm. broad,
elliptic or elliptic-oblong, acute, dark green, with a reddish minutely
toothed margin. _Peduncles_ 3 to 4 at the ends of the branches, about 4
mm. long, bearing a pair of ovate or elliptic bracts and 1 involucre,
glabrous. _Involucre_ about 1·3 to 1·8 cm. in diam., cup-shaped,
glabrous, with 5 glands and 5 transversely oblong, toothed and ciliate,
inflexed, purplish lobes. _Glands_ subcontiguous, about 5 mm. in diam.
across the tips, very concave at the basal part, divided into 3 to 4
spreading finger-like corrugated white processes 2 to 3 mm. long.
_Ovary_ pedicellate, scarcely exserted, with styles 7 mm. long, united
for two-thirds of their length, with entire spreading tips. (National
Herb., Pretoria, No. 2989.)

     PLATE 197.--Fig. 1, inflorescence; Fig. 2, gland with lobes.

     F.P.S.A., 1925.
[Illustration: 198.]




PLATE 198.

VENIDIUM WYLEYI.

_Little Namaqualand._


COMPOSITAE. Tribe ARCTOTIDEAE.

VENIDIUM, _Less._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant_, vol. ii. p. 459.


       *       *       *       *       *

=Venidium Wyley=i, _Harv. Fl. Cap._ vol. iii. p. 463.

       *       *       *       *       *

This Plate, and that on Plate 117, should be compared with _Arctotis
Fosteri_ which we figured on Plate 3, when the difference between the
genera _Venidium_ and _Arctotis_ will be seen. In the former genus the
fruits are without a pappus or with a very rudimentary one, while in the
latter genus a well-developed pappus is always present.

The plant is commonly known as the “Namaqua Daisy,” and in its native
home the flower-heads attain a very large size when the season is
favourable, but may be quite small when no rain has fallen. _Venidium
Wyleyi_ does quite well under cultivation, and is easily grown and forms
a very effective border.

We are indebted to Mr. L. R. Vogt of Waterkloof near Pretoria for the
specimens, which were grown in his garden.

DESCRIPTION:--An erect herb. _Stems_ terete, hollow, striate,
pilose-hoary, laxly leafy. _Cauline leaves_ 1·2 to 15 cm. long, sessile;
the lower lyrato-pinnatifid, amply auricled, amplexicaul, on both sides
cobwebby-tomentose; the upper broadly ovate, closely crowded in the
young stems, cobwebby-tomentose, obtuse, with the margins entire or
remotely 1 to 2 toothed. _Heads_ peduncled, terminal, very large and
showy, 8 cm. in diam. (including the rays), the buds very hoary.
_Involucral bracts_ imbricate, in several rows; the outer narrower,
reflexed, herbaceous, green; the innermost row much longer, broadly
scariose, spreading below the rays; the whole involucre densely
cobwebby. _Receptacle_ 1·8 cm. in diam., convex, deeply honeycombed,
with the margins of the cells produced into a few bristles.
_Ray-florets_ female, 1-seriate, alternate rays spreading, others at
first ascending, then spreading, giving an appearance of two rows.
_Corolla_ ligulate; lamina bright orange coloured, oblong-cuneate, very
faintly 3-toothed at apex, of lower whorl smaller (2·5 cm. long) and
with a smaller brow-black blotch at the base than that of upper whorl (3
cm. long); tube 3 mm. long, broader at base than at the top,
subglabrous. _Ovary_ obovate in outline, muricated, glabrous; style 4
mm. long, cylindric, glabrous; stigmatic portion wider, with the
branches 0·5 mm. long, linear, flat, spreading. _Disc-florets_
hermaphrodite, fertile, numerous, crowded on the head. _Corolla_ 4 mm.
long, subcylindric, 5-cleft at the apex for about a quarter the length
of the tube, with 5 longitudinal rows of glandular hairs; lobes
blackish, 1 mm. long, linear, subacute, with the angles between the
lobes obtuse. _Anthers_ purplish, black, 2 mm. long, obtuse, with a
small suborbicular apical appendage; filaments 1·5 mm. long, linear,
flat, at length filiform, inserted on lower half of corolla tube.
_Ovary_ obovate in outline, white, muricated, glabrous; style 5·5 mm.
long, at first narrowly cylindric, then in upper half abruptly widening
into a yellow stigmatic portion, 2 mm. long, slightly cleft at the apex,
becoming much exserted. (National Herb., Pretoria, No. 2944.)

     PLATE 198.--Fig. 1, longitudinal section of receptacle; Fig. 2,
     ray-floret; Fig. 3, disc-floret; Fig. 4, inner involucral-bract;
     Fig. 5, outer involucral-bract; Fig. 6, achene.

     F.P.S.A., 1923.
[Illustration: 199.]




PLATE 199.

ERICA BLENNA var. GRANDIFLORA.

_Cape Province._


ERICACEAE. Tribe ERICEAE.

ERICA, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. ii. p. 590.


       *       *       *       *       *

=Erica blenna=, _Salisb._ var. =grandiflora=, _Bolus. Fl. Cap._ vol. iv. sect. i.
p. 202.

       *       *       *       *       *

Through the courtesy of Dr. J. Muir of Riversdale we are able to figure
for the first time a species of heath, and perhaps one of the most
beautiful of all the Cape heaths. The variety _grandiflora_ is only
found as far as we know in the Riversdale and Bredasdorp Districts and
is by no means a common plant. It is known locally as the “lantern” or
“Riversdale” heath. The species itself, like so many of the South
African species of _Erica_, was first collected by Masson about the year
1772, and was successfully cultivated in Europe and figured on more than
one occasion in early botanical literature.

DESCRIPTION:--Erect, 0·3 to 0·5 m. high. _Branches_ stout, ascending,
virgate or flexuous, puberulous or glabrous. _Leaves_ 3-nate, mostly
erect and imbricate or subspreading, linear, subobtuse, flat above,
keeled and sulcate beneath, glabrous, 8 to 10 mm. long. _Flowers_
usually solitary, rarely in pairs (“here and there sublateral,”
Bentham). _Pedicels_ about 8 mm. long; bracts remote, lanceolate, about
6 mm. long; sepals ovate, acuminate, keel-tipped, thickish, subscarious,
viscid, coloured or greenish, about 5 mm. long. _Corolla_ conical-ovoid
or suburceolate-conical, much contracted to the mouth but only slightly
constricted at the throat, very viscid, 1·6 to 2 cm. long, bright
orange-red, the limb and some distance below it green; segments
spreading or erect, about one-eighth the length of the tube; filaments
broad at the base tapering upwards, bent below the anther; anthers
included, dorsifixed well above the base, cuneate, subacute,
scaberulous, ciliolate, about 3 mm. long, crested; pore three-fifths to
two-thirds the length of the cell; crests quite free from the filament,
subsemiorbicular in outline, deeply inciso-lacerate, about half the
length of the cell; style included, straight; stigma capitellate; ovary
glabrous. (National Herb., Pretoria, No. 2991.)

     PLATE 199.--Fig. 1, pedicel showing bracts; Fig. 2, androecium and
     gynaecium; Fig. 3, single stamen; Fig. 4, pistil; Fig. 5, anther
     enlarged.

     F.P.S.A., 1925.
[Illustration: 200.]




PLATE 200.

DIMORPHOTHECA CUNEATA.

_Cape Province, Natal, Orange Free State._


COMPOSITAE. Tribe CALENDULEAE.

DIMORPHOTHECA, _Moench._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. ii. p. 453.


       *       *       *       *       *

=Dimorphotheca cuneata=, _Less. Syn._ 257; _Fl. Cap._ vol. iii. p. 422.

       *       *       *       *       *

We are indebted for the specimens, from which the accompanying Plate was
prepared, to Mr. C. A. Smith, B.Sc., who collected them in September
1925 on the botanical reserve near Fauresmith, Orange Free State.
According to Mr. Smith the plants cover the hill-sides and from a
distance appear as large white patches. It flowers very profusely, so
much so that the leaves are almost hidden by the mass of flowers. The
laminae of the ray-florets are white above and copper-coloured beneath,
not yellow as described in the _Flora Capensis_.

The specimens collected by Mr. Smith are an exact match with those
collected by Zeyher (No. 2812). Zeyher No. 3066, quoted by Harvey as _D.
cuneata_, is quite a different plant, perhaps a _Tripteris_. We have
accepted the specific name “cuneata,” as this was the name given by Mr.
N. E. Brown to a specimen collected by Mr. E. E. Galpin. Locally known
as “mak-bietou.”

DESCRIPTION:--A densely and closely branched bushy shrub up to 1·05 m.
high, the older branches naked, rough, the younger short and closely
leafy. _Leaves_ varying in shape (linear to obovate) and size (0·5 to
1·3 cm. long), always cuneate at the base, sharply 2 to 4 toothed,
obscurely mid-ribbed, gland-dotted, subdecurrent, glabrous or nearly so.
_Peduncles_ terminal, 2 to 3·5 cm. long, glandular-pubescent,
viscidulous, becoming widened at the top. _Involucre_ uni-seriate,
glaucescent, viscidulous; scales linear-acuminate, minutely
glandular-puberulous, with pale-edged and ciliate margins. _Receptacle_
about 3·5 mm. in diam., nude, flat. Ray-florets female, uniseriate.
_Corolla_ ligulate, white above, yellow to bronze-coppery below; lamina
spreading, finely-three toothed, cuneate at the base; tube of corolla
1·5 mm. long, terete, glandular-hairy. _Ovary_ triquetrous, green,
obconic, somewhat curved, glandular hairy with stalked glands, with the
angular margins bluntly toothed; style 4·5 mm. long, cylindric,
glabrous; branches 2 mm. long, yellow, flat, subacute. _Disc-florets_
hermaphrodite, fertile. _Corolla-tube_ yellow, 3 mm. long, subcylindric,
with a 5-fid limb, very densely glandular-hairy at the base, glabrous
above. _Anthers_ 3 mm. long, subsagittate at the base, with an ovate
obtuse apical appendage. _Ovary_ very much laterally compressed,
obcordate, glandular, with a wide thick-rimmed entire marginal wing;
style 6 mm. long, cylindric, glabrous; branches appearing truncate with
a ring of bristles, capped by a short conical apex. (National Herb.,
Pretoria, No. 2990.)

     PLATE 200.--Fig. 1, ray-floret; Fig. 2, ray-achene; Fig. 3,
     disc-floret; Fig. 4, disc-achene; Fig. 5, stamen.

     F.P.S.A., 1925.




INDEX TO VOLUME V.


      PLATE

ALOE ARBORESCENS _var._ FRUTESCENS, 187

ALOE CHABAUDII, 164

ALOE FEROX, 169

ALOE MARLOTHII, 171

ALOE RUPESTRIS, 178

ALOE SESSILIFLORA, 180

ATHRIXIA ELATA, 195

CEROPEGIA HAYGARTHII, 191

COTYLEDON ORBICULATA, 161

CRASSULA COLUMNARIS, 173

CRASSULA LATICEPHALA, 189

CRASSULA ROSULARIS, 167

DERMATOBOTRYS SAUNDERSII, 188

DIMORPHOTHECA CUNEATA, 200

ERICA BLENNA _var._ GRANDIFLORA, 199

EUPHORBIA TRIDENTATA, 197

GAZANIA SUFFRUTICOSA, 183

GLADIOLUS CRUENTUS, 182

GLADIOLUS ORCHIDIFLORUS, 165

GLADIOLUS TRICHOSTACHYS, 163

GLADIOLUS TRISTIS, 175

HAEMANTHUS ALBIFLOS, 190

HYPOXIS ROOPERI, 172

LACHENALIA RUBIDA _var._ TIGRINA, 184

LACHENALIA TRICOLOR, 166

LEUCADENDRON HUMIFUSUM, 170

LISSOCHILUS SPECIOSUS, 168

ORNITHOGALUM ODORATISSIMUM, 194

PROTEA HARMERI, 192

PROTEA MUNDII, 185

PROTEA PITYPHYLLA, 177

SARCOPHYTE SANGUINEA, 176

SENECIO FULGENS, 179

SENECIO TAMOIDES, 174

STAPELIA GIGANTEA _var._ PALLIDA, 181

STRELITZIA REGINAE, 186

SUTERA BURKEANA, 196

SUTHERLANDIA FRUTESCENS, 193

SYNNOTIA BICOLOR, 162

VENIDIUM WYLEYI, 198

       *       *       *       *       *





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FLOWERING PLANTS OF SOUTH AFRICA VOL. 5 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


